
Chapter Nine
BREAST FEEDING
“Milk, The Importance of Its Source,’”’ ‘Influence of Breast Feeding on
Facial Development”’

The superiority of human milk for human babies is natural.
Human milk is rich in structural proteins, fats, hormones, enzymes
and vitamins essential for the optimum growth of the human brain as
well as body. Its exact formula remains a secret and has not been
duplicated in the laboratory.

Alterations in the metabolism of a mother can quickly reflect in
the health of her nursing infant. A deficient mother will have defi-
cient milk and when her diet is improved, the improvement will af-
fect her milk. The alert physician caring for a nursing infant does not
take the baby off the breast as soon as an incompatibility arises, but
on the contrary, he immediately attempts to treat the mother know-
ing well that the nursing infant will give him information far sooner
than the mother as to the correctness of his treatment. For example,
an infant developing a mild eczematoid rash while on the breast
merely requires a minor alteration in the mother’s fatty acid intake.
The alteration may react on the infant as early as the next day;
sometimes the next feeding. Though the metabolites from a mother’s
milk may be imperfect and require correction if adequate lactation is
to take place, the alternative sources of milk may have far greater im-
perfections.

Oscar Erf frequently cites an experiment in which groups of twin
calves are fed the same milk. One twin suckles, the other drinks from
a bucket. At the end of the year, the marked superiority of the suckl-
ed calves is recognized by the cattle judges evaluating them.

Professor Erf thought that the oxygen churned into the milk by the
act of milking altered the chemical composition of the milk so that it
was not as nutritious as that which was squeezed from the teat direct-
ly into the calf’s mouth, and there is little question that oxygen
changes delicate nutritive substances in milk.
Of equal or greater effect, however, are the changes brought by the 
processes of pasteurizing, condensing, homogenizing and reconstituting milk. Add to this
the deficient, dry feed dietary of most dairy cattle and you will find
that cow’s milk is usually a poor second to mother’s milk. An excep-
tion to this exists in the case of an untreated hypothyroid mother. A
high quality, raw cow’s milk proves superior to her milk.

There is another advantage to breast feeding. The active exercise in
nursing provides a growth stimulant to the muscles of the face, neck,
chest and spine. Some of the strongest muscles of the human body
are the facial muscles used for chewing. As the bony structures of
children are soft and pliable, when the facial muscles are exercised,
they pull on the bony structure of the skull and increase its size. The
action of nursing provides initial exercise to the face which is not
found in the action of sucking milk from a bottle.

The breast fed infant is forced to work to extract milk. The infant
pulls, pushes, kicks, pounds with his fists, plays hide-and-seek and
exercises every muscle in his face and every muscle in his back. He
juts his jaw forward and pulls it back, using his pterygoids, his
masseters, his temporals, his linguals and his nuchal muscles as he
enjoys his meal. In his exercising, he develops his malar processes
which from a medical perspective means nasal passageways with
good drainage and less susceptibility to infection, more symmetrical
dental arches and regular dentition.

What about the bottle fed baby? A rubber nipple does not have the
soft warmth, the life that causes it to respond to the infant’s tug. It is
dead; and if it doesn’t deliver milk, there is no by-play between in-
fant and mother. It just won’t give. Baby bawls, swallows air and has
the lifeless thing thrust into his mouth again and again until the
blockage problem is discovered. When a red-hot pin opens the nip-
ple, the milk flows; it rushes out and over and down baby’s cheeks
while baby almost drowns, but he does get his feeding. He burps up
some liquid and is put back in his crib—frustrated.

No play, no exercise in the feeding process, just another squaller
with colic. He did use some muscles, but an entirely different group
than the breast fed baby. He usually is placed on his back, bottle
propped just so to maximize the flow of gravity and all the infant
need do is suck, suck, suck and he may be a sucker all his life as a
result. How about his face muscles? His neck muscles? His back
muscles? 
He has hardly moved for fear the bottle might roll off and be lost.
His hands, feet and their connections, the trunk, arms and
legs, move helplessly in the air.

Comparative Facial Development Between

Nursed and Bottle Fed Infants

In the following study of three hundred and twenty-seven patients of all ages, we analyzed the
effects of nursing and bottle feeding on the facial development of the
malar processes. We attempted to eliminate the external variables
most apt to influence facial development: (1) heredity, (2) nutrition,
and (3) exercise. To limit the influence of heredity in our study, we
selected patients from the white race. To limit the influence of nutri-
tion, we chose patients from a professional and business class which
enjoyed a similar intake of the more sought after foods. This left ex-
ercise as the major variable. There were minor variables to discount
also. For instance, the quality of a nursing mother’s milk varies in
proportion to her health; further, mother’s milk contains growth
stimulating steroids and phosphatases not contained in pasteurized
formulas. Finally, the majority of those who came to the clinic as pa-
tients did so because of respiratory ailments, and so this study is bas-
ed on a group suffering from poor facial development to a greater or
lesser degree.

The masseter is the chief muscle of chewing and its bony origin in
the malar prominence of the zygoma is easy to measure. The
masseter pulls and stimulates the malar prominence to grow
downward and laterally. A large malar prominence is of value not
only because it protects the eye and has aesthetic value, but because it
is the foundation for a powerful bite. The distance from the most
lateral part of the right malar prominence to the corresponding part
of the left malar prominence is called the bimalar distance and it
measures lateral malar growth. Just above the zygomatic bones are
the frontal bones which come down laterally to the eyes. The
distance from the right zygomaticofrontal suture is called the bior-
bital distance. The bones near the zygomaticofrontal suture serve
chewing as the malar prominences do.

The bimalar and biorbital bony landmarks have almost no fat over
them which makes them easy to measure. The difference between the
two areas is important because the masseter muscle attaches to the
malar prominence, but no muscle attaches to the zygomaticofacial
suture.


Therefore, the biorbital distance is a control against which
the growth of the bimalar distance can be measured as it is influenced
by sucking, suckling and chewing.

To determine the influence of nursing on facial development, the
biorbital and bimalar distances of each individual is measured. The
same physician made all the measurements and a nurse took a history
of how long each patient had been nursed. Tables VIII and IX show
our findings for the whole series.

Those individuals who are not nursed at all show the least malar
growth. Those nursed three months or less show better malar
growth, and those nursed more than three months show the best
growth of all. 
In Table IX, we see that the percent of individuals who
have well-developed malar processes depends on the length of time
they are nursed as infants. Only 10,5 percent of those not nursed
have a bimalar distance larger than their biorbital distance. Of those
nursed three months or under, 23,6 percent have a bimalar distance
larger than their biorbital distance. Breast feeding for more than
three months causes the best facial development as 57,2 percent of
these individuals have a bimalar distance greater than their biorbital
distance.

In Tables X, XI and XII, we analyze these patients by age groups.
The following becomes apparent:

1. The malar processes grow at least until the age of 25.

2. The bimalar distance is less than the biorbital distance in most
children under twelve regardless of the amount of nursing.

3. Nursing increases the percentage of children under twelve who have
bimalar distances greater than biorbital distances.

4. After twelve years of age, more children have well-developed malar
processes than have poorly developed ones. This is so only if
they are nursed more than three months. If they are nursed for
less than three months, the great majority have poorly
developed zygomatic bones.

5. Most individuals over twenty-five years have fairly well-developed malar
processes regardless of whether or not they are nursed as in-
fants, but good malar development is still more common among
the ones who are well-nursed.

Why is good facial development important in a young child? Con-
sider the disorders that come from poor development. A face that is
narrow in the frontal region has crowded sinuses and a narrow dental
arch. Crowded sinuses lead to respiratory problems, and a narrow
dental arch leads to impactions, displaced teeth, malocclusions and
agnathia. These defects interfere with good nutrition as the afflicted
individual often prefers thoroughly cooked and macerated foods
because they are easier to chew. But foods so prepared have lost im-
portant nutritive elements. For example, heating tomatoes in contact
with air destroys their vitamin C content. Cooking meats well-done
to make them tender denatures the unsaturated lipids which the body
needs to make hormones. A patient on such a diet will not ingest the
proper building blocks to nourish his body. His resistance to 
infections will be low, and he may develop degenerative diseases. 


The first step in giving a person the right nutrition is to make him able to eat
the right foods in sufficient quantity. This depends on the adequacy
of his facial development, the strength of his muscles and the shape
of his masticating bones.

Dentofacial deformity requiring mechanical reconstruction by the
use of braces, retainers and bands is a wide-spread problem. There
can be no doubt that modern dentofacial problems are encouraged,
if not actually caused, by defective diets, by pathologic conditions of
the nose and throat and by general poor health. There also can be no
doubt that the study we conducted on three hundred and twenty-seven patients reveals that the
wholesale bottle feeding of our infant population is contributing to
this problem.
