
Chapter Five
THE EFFECT OF RAW AND COOKED FOOD ON THE
CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS CONTENT OF BONES
“Deficient Calcification Produced by Diet: Experimental and Clinical Con-
sideration,”’ ‘Reciprocal Relationship of Soil, Plant and Animal,’’ ‘‘The
Influence of Heat Labile Factors on Nutrition in Oral Development and
Health”

The calcium and phosphorus content as well as the weight and size
of the femurs of normal and deficient cats are determined at death.
The kittens of mother cats on raw food and on cooked food all prove
to have approximately the same amount of calcium and phosphorus
at birth. Quite often this is within two to three percent of that found
in the mothers. See Table III.

After the first two weeks, a marked depletion of the calcium and
phosphorus content of the femurs occurs in the kittens. This cor-
responds to the period of the greatest growth. However, within two
months, the bones of the kittens nurtured on raw food are ap-
proaching normal in respect to these salts while those of the kittens
on cooked food lag behind. This effect is still more pronounced in
the second and third deficient generations; that is, the bones of the
second and third generation deficient kittens on cooked food are
markedly deficient in calcium and phosphorus. 

Kittens on raw food
have from two to three times as much calcium and phosphorus in
their bones. See Tables IV and V.


In Tables IV and V, the kittens are maintained on the respective
diets of their mothers. The mothers on cooked meat are fed this diet
at least six months before conception and throughout pregnancy.
The ages of the twenty raw meat nurtured kittens and twenty cooked meat
nurtured kittens range from one day to 14,5 months. The marked
superiority of the raw meat nurtured kittens as to weight of body and
of femur is evident. The average body weight is one thousand and eight grams for the
raw meat kittens and six hundred and thirty-eight for the cooked meat kittens; the average
weight of the femurs is 4,23 grams for the raw meat animals and 3,35
for the cooked meat. The average calcium content of the raw meat
animals is 9,48 percent and 5,53 percent for the cooked meat. The
average phosphorus contents is 4,55 and 2,63 respectively. The
average calcium/phosphorus ratio is 2,08/1 for the raw meat kittens
and 2,63/1 for the cooked meat kittens. The higher
calcium/phosphorus ratio in cooked meat cats is found in other
studies.

When the experiment is repeated using milk as the test food, there
is an equally profound change in the bones of the animals.

The percent of calcium in the bones of raw and cooked food kit-
tens is plotted on the abscissa with logarithm of age as the ordinate.
See Figure 5,1. Kittens show a variability with age. It is to be noted
that the peaks and dips are comparable in the two curves; each of the
major dips corresponds to periods of eruption of teeth.

Analysis of the femurs of normal cats shows that the total amount
of calcium in the fresh bone is approximately twice that of the
phosphorus. The calcium in the femurs of normal adult cats with
healthy parentage ranges between twelve and seventeen percent and the
phosphorus ranges between six and 81/2 percent. The calcium content
of the femur of the normal second generation kitten up to one year
of age falls between eight and twelve percent. The deficient kitten of the se-
cond generation up to one year of age falls between 3/2 and seven per-
cent. The third generation deficient cat may fall to the remarkable
low of 11/ to three percent of calcium. See Figure 52.

In Table VI, eighteen adult cats comparable in size, background and
general development are studied. Of the twelve raw meat fed and six cook-
ed meat fed animals, the average weight of the raw meat is 2309
grams and two thousand, two hundred and fifty-three for the cooked meat. The average weight of the
femurs of the raw meat fed cats is 9,05 and 9,42 for those on cooked
meat. The average calcium is 14,98 percent and 13,10 percent respec-
tively, and the average phosphorus content is 6,91 percent and 6,26
percent. The calcium/phosphorus ratio is constant: 2,1/1 and 2,09/1.


Deficient cats on cooked meat and heat-processed milk reveal a
decrease in the diameter of their bones while their long bones tend to
increase in length. By the third generation, these bones are soft like
sponge rubber. They show spontaneous fractures on the slightest
provocation; however, the fractures usually heal. Epiphyseal slips
and injuries to the vertebras are common. The bones of the mandible
are just as soft as the other bones and the teeth can be easily moved
by the slightest touch of the finger.

Just as the calcium apparently diminishes progressively from the
first through the second and the third generations of deficient cats,
so there is a concomitant increase in the porosity of the bones. This is
revealed through X-rays of the zygomatic arch. The trabecular struc-
tures become increasingly coarse. See Figures 5,3 and 5,4.

The first deficient generation shows trabeculation with the
fineness of a silk scarf, that of the second generation is similar to a
plain cotton handkerchief and that of the third generation is more
like mosquito netting. Just as these three deficient structures vary in
their mesh, so they vary in their ability to provide support.

When cats have excellent calcification through their growing years
up to the time of the closure of the epiphyses of the long bones, they
have an excellent start in life. Those which show low calcification
during their early years of life are less able to stand the usual stresses
and strains ahead.


during their early years of life are less able to stand the usual stresses
and strains ahead.