
Introduction

Between the years of 1932 and 1942, Dr. Francis Marion Pot-
tenger, Jr., conducted a feeding experiment to determine the effects
of heat-processed food on cats. His ten-year cat study was prompted
by the high rate of mortality he was experiencing among his
laboratory cats undergoing adrenalectomies for use in standardizing
the hormone content of the adrenal extract he was making. Because
there were no existent chemical procedures for standardizing
biological extracts, manufacturers of such extracts necessarily had to
use animals to determine their potency. As cats die without their
adrenal glands, the dose of extract required to support their lives
calibrated the level of the extract’s potency.

In his effort to maximize the preoperative health of his laboratory
animals, Francis fed them a diet of market grade raw milk, cod liver
oil and cooked meat scraps from the sanatorium. These scraps in-
cluded the liver, tripe, sweetbreads, brains, heart and muscle. This
diet was considered to be rich in all the important nutritive
substances by the experts of the day, and the surgical technique used
for the adrenalectomies was the most exacting known. Therefore,
Francis was perplexed as to why his cats were poor operative risks. In
seeking an explanation, he began noticing that the cats showed signs
of deficiency. All showed a decrease in their reproductive capacity
and many of the kittens born in the laboratory had skeletal defor-
mities and organ malfunctions.

As his neighbors in Monrovia kept donating an increasing number
of cats to his laboratory, the demand for cooked meat scraps exceed-
ed supply and he placed an order at the local meat packing plant for
raw meat scraps, again including the viscera, muscle and bone. These
raw meat scraps were fed to a segregated group of cats each day and
within a few months this group appeared in better health than the
animals being fed cooked meat scraps. Their kittens appeared more
vigorous, and most interestingly, their operative mortality decreased
markedly.



The contrast in the apparent health of the cats fed raw meat and
those fed cooked meat was so startling, it prompted Francis to 
undertake a controlled experiment. What he had observed by
chance, he wanted to repeat by design. He wanted to find answers to
such questions as: Why did the cats eating raw meat survive their
operations more readily than those eating cooked meat? Why did the
kittens of the raw meat fed cats appear more vigorous? Why did a
diet based on cooked meat scraps apparently fail to provide the
necessary nutritional elements for good health? He felt the findings
of a controlled feeding experiment might illumine new facts about
optimal human nutrition.

The Cat Study of Francis Pottenger, Jr., is unique. There is no
similar experiment in the medical literature. The pathological and
chemical findings were supervised by Francis in consultation with
Alvin G. Foord, M.D., professor of pathology at the University of
Southern California and pathologist at the Huntington Memorial
Hospital in Pasadena. Accordingly, the studies met the most
rigorous scientific standards of the day and their protocol was
observed consistently.

Since The Cat Study is unique, its findings are frequently quoted
and misquoted in order to justify the ideas of others. For example,
one author of a popular selling book states that 200 cats died of ar-
thritis; this indeed did not happen. Another author states that the
cats were fed sprouts and survived in full health for four continuous
generations. Again, no such experiment took place, and yet this
misinformation has been traced over a dozen or more different ar-
ticles and books.

A frequent criticism of The Pottenger Cat Study is that it was not
properly controlled. Here it is necessary to ask, ‘‘By what stand-
ards?’’ Every one of the studies followed strictly defined protocol.
All variables in the stock of the animals were reported and explained.
Because some of the test procedures may seem crude forty years
later, this in no way invalidates the facts that the procedures were
meticulously controlled and that the results of the experiments were
reported as observed.

Another criticism is that the cats were kept in an artificial environ-
ment unrelated to real living conditions. Such a criticism overlooks
the experimental necessity of maintaining a controlled environment
to provide valid findings. It also overlooks the evidence that given
specific living conditions, specific changes repeatedly occurred in the
health of the cats under observation.



Another frequent criticism is that the experimental work done on
cat nutrition has no appropriate application to human nutrition.
Francis Pottenger, Jr., never stated that a one-to-one comparison
could be made between his findings in cat nutrition and his findings
in human nutrition. He did say: ‘‘While no attempt will be made to
correlate the changes in the animals studied with malformations
found in humans, the similarity is so obvious that parallel pictures
will suggest themselves.’’

All too often, self-appointed authorities will state categorically
that they do not believe other’s observations and so seek to close the
door on any further inquiry into these observations. They declare,
“Because I do not believe the facts as presented, they are not so.”
Far better for science if responsible individuals maintain an attitude
of open inquiry and test the observations of others before forming
rigid opinions. In the case of The Cat Study, human welfare might
well be served if concerned researchers made every effort to discover
if valid correlations can be made between cat nutrition and human
nutrition. It must be remembered that cats and humans both are
mammalian biological systems.

It would be of great value to the field of nutrition to repeat The
Cat Study within the parameters of present day technology and with
the use of present day antibiotics. Most of the cats on deficient diets
died from infections of the kidneys, lungs and bones. If these infec-
tions were eliminated as a cause of death by antibiotics, it would
allow the cats to reveal their ultimate degenerative fates. As an exten-
sion to this experiment, it would be of interest to study the effects of
vitamin and mineral supplementation in the diet of cooked food fed
animals.*

It is our effort in this monograph to present the observations made
by Francis M. Pottenger, Jr., on the effects of deficient and op-
timum nutrition in cats and human beings as recorded in his articles
and clinical records written between the years of 1932 and 1956.
Nothing has been added or subtracted from his findings, and for the
most part, the words describing his work are his own. Though some
of the scientific interpretations have not withstood the test of time,
the observations are valid. A careful and selective interpretation by
an inquiring mind will readily differentiate the two.

*The Price Pottenger Nutrition Foundation is interested in research repeating
The Cat Study and related experiments.


The text of Part I, Part II and Part III is
taken from the published articles of Fran-
cis M. Pottenger, Jr., listed in italics at the
beginning of each chapter. The articles are
available for purchase from the Price-
Pottenger Nutrition Foundation. Their text
has been edited and integrated for the pur-
poses of this presentation; however, the
writing is largely in its original form.

