
Chapter Eleven
MILK AND THE HUMAN SKELETON
“The Clinical Significance of the Osseous System,’’ ‘‘Clinical Evidence of
the Value of Raw Milk,’’ “‘Deficient Calcification Produced by Diet: Ex-
perimental and Clinical Considerations”’

Webster’s International Dictionary defines the skeleton as ‘‘the
bones of a human being or other vertebrate collectively; the bony or
more or less cartilaginous framework supporting the soft tissues and
protecting the internal organs.’’ Yet, the skeleton is much more than
this. It is a mineral storehouse as well as a blood building organ. The
fluidity of the skeleton’s mineral content and its relationship to the
electrolytic, hence physiologic balance, is critical to the health of the
individual. The bones are living organs which not only act as sup-

. portive tissues for the muscles and organs, but also as dynamic units
whose biological efficiency must be in proportion to the functional
activity of the body as a whole. The size of the skeleton as compared
to the size of the body, the density of the bones and the appearance
and time of closure of the epiphyses provide evidence of the efficien-
cy of the individual’s growth and development.

One of our specific measurements for comparing and evaluating
the quality of children’s nutrition is the density of their bones as
revealed by X-ray. We use the density of bones as an index of the
amount of minerals available for physiological processes. The child,
who has a compact cortex and compact trabeculation, has a much
higher electrolytic reserve than the child who has the same size bones
with a relatively coarse mesh. Moreover, when the size of the shaft of
the bone is considered in relation to its mineral density, we can pro-
ject a child’s muscular development into adulthood. For instance, it
is impossible for a fine boned skeleton to support the musculature
necessary for hard physical labor just as it is impossible for a child
with a small body frame to become a professional football player.




Lack of bone mineralization is playing an ever-increasing role
among the aged causing spontaneous crushing of vertebras, par-
ticularly those of the lower thoracic and lumbar regions. The soft-
ness of these spinal bones and their inability to bear body weight are
causing many old people to spend their last years in misery. Fractures
of the neck of the femur among the elderly are precipitating more
deaths than in the past, and we are seeing an increasing number of
these fractures in the middle aged. Even the young are suffering
more bone fractures as a result of trivial accidents in their gym-
nasiums or on their playgrounds.
Deficient Calcification

A normal supply of calcium and its proper utilization are impor-
tant to an individual throughout life. Evidence is developing that
calcium deficiency is not uncommon. Even though the ordinary diet
is supposed to be adequate in its calcium content, it is only necessary
to look at the teeth, facial development and osseous problems of all
ages to recognize that something is wrong with the calcium me-
tabolism of a large percentage of our population. In order to in-
fluence calcification in patients, we have given them diets rich in
calcium, have administered quantities of calcium salts over long
periods of time, and have administered vitamins to aid assimilation,
and yet we have been unable to establish normal calcium utilization.

This failure suggests that some factor or factors are lacking in the
ordinary diet which are necessary for the proper assimilation and
deposition of this mineral in the bones. Ruling out a lack of exposure
to the mineral itself, we began correlating our clinical findings with
our findings in The Cat Study. Cats on fresh, raw foods have no ap-
parent problems utilizing the calcium in their diet and have strong
bones while the cats on cooked foods suffer symptoms of calcium
deficiency not unlike those of our patients. By adding fresh and raw
foods to our patient’s diets, a marked improvement became
noticeable in their calcium assimilation as recorded in their X-rays.
Again, it suggests that heat labile substances in foods exert control
over calcium utilization in cats and humans alike and that these
substances are destroyed by heat and oxidation.
Effects of Different Milks on Bone Development

The following study of one hundred and fifty children drinking different types of
milk compares their bone age and skeletal structures. 

The bone age 
tables of Engelbach (22) are used. We make a somewhat arbitrary
adjustment to the standard we use for normal because if we use the
bones of a breast fed, hardy farm boy or girl as the standard for nor-
mal, ninety-five percent of the children in our study would show deficiency.
By adjusting our normal standard, only fifty-four percent reveal deficiency.
Our classification of ‘‘poorly calcified’’ is also somewhat arbitrarily
based on our X-ray studies of the calcification of the bones in the
wrist, feet and tip of the clavical.

There are thirty-one infants in this study who are breast fed for six months
or more. Among these, nineteen show maternal histories of thyroid
dysfunction and others have histories of severe genital disorders.
Bearing in mind that the activity of the thyroid is closely associated
with the development of the skeleton and that the deficiencies of the
mother are apparently transferred to the offspring, it is not surpris-
ing that many of these 3! infants present deficiencies. On the basis of
the Engelbach studies, eighteen of the children show delay in the develop-
ment of the centers of ossification, four are slightly advanced and nine are
normal. Seven children have fine bones and seven show large, poorly
calcified bones with weak joints of the rachitic type.

Six children in the study receive Raw Certified Milk, five taking the
milk without modification. In this group the osseous and skeletal
developments are excellent. Four drink Metabolized Vitamin D Milk
and of these, two show a slight advance in the osseous development, | is
normal and | shows delay.

Another group of eight children on raw milk formulas shows no devia-
tion from standard in their osseous centers. One shows a fine bone
development.

The largest single group in this study consists of forty-three canned milk
fed children. The so-called adapted milks (prepared formulas such as
Similac) are not segregated from the milk powders or from the con-
densed milks because we find little if any difference in their effects
on ossification. The striking features of this group of forty-three children is
that over one-half (23) have very fine, small bones; nine have marked
disturbances in calcification though the bones are of normal size or
larger than normal, and nine exhibit marked weaknesses in their joints
and ligaments. When the bone age of all the children is calculated, 23
are below the normal standard for their age, fifteen are normal and five are
above normal.




When ten pasteurized milk formula babies are studied, four are
delayed in ossification, three are normal and three are advanced beyond their
age. The bones of seven are fine, one is normal and two are rachitic.

In another boiled milk formula group of thirty-four children, twenty-one show
delayed bone age, twelve are normal and | advanced. Eighteen have fine
osseous development, six show normal development and ten are of the
poorly calcified, large bone class.

Two children on formula containing no milk or milk products
show delayed bone age with enlarged, weak joints.

Figure 11.1 A represents an X-ray of a nine month old boy nursed
nine months by a healthy mother eating a diet rich in fresh foods
grown on her own farm. The baby has bones of large diameter. His
development is normal for his age and he has fully recovered from
the period of lowered calcification that follows birth. His skull is
large, he has a well-developed dental arch and has ample space for all
his teeth. His soft tissues are of excellent tone and X-rays suggest ex-
cellent calcification.

Figure 11,1 B represents an infant of similar age to A. The mother
is hypothyroid and unable to nurse her child. The baby is placed on
undiluted raw cow’s milk of the best grade obtainable. He has
smaller bones, not quite as dense as those of A, but of fair quality.



He shows a fair recovery from the normal lowered calcification
following birth, has good facial development, but inferior to that of
A Bones from X-ray studies suggest good calcification, but again
less than A Tissue tone is good.

Figure 11,1 C shows the skeleton of an infant whose mother has
many symptoms of deficiency. She is unable to nurse her child. The
baby is placed on all kinds of cooked milk formulas. As a result, he
makes a poor recovery from the lowered calcification following
birth. He shows delay in osseous development, has small bones,
distorted facial structures and is generally deficient in physiologic
reaction.

Figure one hundred and twelve shows the skull of a well-developed female, age 38,
whose good diet carries her through her growing years until at 19, she
decides it is necessary to economize on her food in order to ‘‘suc-
ceed’’ in her chosen work. She loses her third molars and develops
cavities in four more teeth. Some of her bones are slightly more radio
translucent than normal. However, though suffering from a pro-
longed period of starvation, she still has a fundamentally excellent
body. Her height is five feet three inches and she has large bones, a broad
thorax, a large body and short legs. The upper and lower halves of
her body are of equal length.




Figure one hundred and thirteen represents the skull of an individual who belongs to the
third generation of individuals on deficient diets. The family history
of deficiency includes the mother and grandmother. Her age is the
same as that of Figure 112, thirty-eight years old. She is six feet and her bony
structures show poor calcification. She has a poorly developed skull
and has small bones, a small thorax and has lost most of her teeth.
The lower half of her body is much longer than the upper half. She
lacks the vitality to work more than one day a week.

The pattern of calcification of a child depends upon the diet and
health of the mother; and in the case of Figure 113, on the grand-
mother and perhaps remoter ancestors as well. The pattern of
calcification also depends on whether or not the infant is nursed, and
if not nursed, on what type of formula it is raised. Our experimental
work proves that an adequate amount of heat labile substances are
necessary in a mother’s milk as well as in any substitute food in order
for proper calcification of the skeleton to take place. It is these very
substances which are destroyed in pasteurized and boiled milk for-
mulas and in the cooked foods later added to a child’s diet.

In applying what we have learned in The Cat Study and in our
clinical experience, we find that there is little that can be done to
change the calcification that is established at the end of a child’s
growing period.

If a child’s calcification is poor at this time, it will
remain poor throughout his life. On the positive side, it is possible to
improve the calcification of children who are still growing and have
been on deficient diets by giving them the highest grade of raw milk,
raw meat, raw vegetables and fresh fruits.
