
Chapter Seven
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
OF THE CAT STUDY
“Nutritional Aspects of the Orthodontic Problem,’’ ‘‘Heat Labile Factors
Necessary for the Proper Growth and Development of Cats,’’ ‘‘Clinical
Significance of the Osseous System,’’ ‘‘Clinical Evidence of the Value of
Raw Milk,’’ ‘“‘The Effect of Heat Processed Foods and Metabolized
Vitamin D Milk on the Dentofacial Structures of Experimental Animals’’

On controlled experimental diets we have been able to bring about
developmental failure in cats. We have shown that allergic man-
ifestations and dental disturbances comparable to those seen in
human beings result from changes in food preparation.

The normal, wild cat subsists upon rodents, birds, reptiles, insects,
fish and a small amount of vegetation and maintains regular features
and normal functions generation after generation. Ordinary house
cats, living a semi-wild life, also maintain regular features and func-
tions generation after generation. In contrast, cats which are
prevented from hunting, subjected to a life of ease and fed prepared,
cooked foods show tendencies towards maldevelopment.

In one experimental study we compare two groups of cats on a
base diet of raw milk and cod liver oil. The only difference in their
food intake is that one group receives cooked meat and the other raw
meat. The meat consists of viscera, muscle and bone, and the cooked
meat is prepared as if for human consumption. Comparisons of the
two groups show many differences in development.

We find animals that receive raw meat show consistent facial
development and normal dentition. Even so, these animals are not
quite as perfect structurally as animals that forage and obtain their
own natural foods. We also find the converse to be true. Those kit-
tens that receive cooked meat instead of raw develop all types of
malformations of the face, jaws and teeth.




Adult cats which forage until they reach their maximum development
and are then placed on a diet of cooked meat show little, if any,
change in the contour of their skulls. An occasional animal might
lose its teeth as a result of extensive decalcification and pyorrhea.
When the well-developed cats are put on the cooked meat diet and
are allowed to become pregnant, their kittens’ skulls show marked
variations from the normal, no two have identical configuration.
These changes occur in spite of ample food intake, and once such
deficiencies are produced and maintained by a faulty diet, they
become progressively worse through the second and third genera-
tions.

Differences in the effects of raw and cooked food appear in the
weights of newborn kittens. During a three year period, sixty-three living kit-
tens born of parents fed raw food have an average weight of 119
grams at birth; and forty-seven kittens born of parents fed cooked food have
an average weight of one hundred grams. There are four dead kittens born in the
raw food group and sixteen in the cooked food group.

The following offers a specific example of weight variations caus-
ed by changes in diet. One cat fed a cooked food diet produces a lit-
ter of four kittens whose average weight is seventy-seven grams. She is then placed
on a raw food diet and her litter for the next year consists of five kittens
with an average birth weight of one hundred and sixteen grams, while the following year
(still on a raw food diet), the litter consists of three kittens with an
average weight of one hundred and thirty-seven grams.

The opposite result may be produced by taking a mother cat that
has been on a raw food diet and placing her on a cooked food diet. In
the case of one cat, her litter consists of five kittens with an average
weight of one hundred and five grams; the following year her litter consists of six kittens
with an average weight of ninety-one grams.

The cats fed cooked food may produce a premature or full-term
litter of stillborn kittens. One cat proves unable to deliver her kittens
even after seventy-two hours of labor. If a mother cat is kept on cooked food
for more than two years, she usually dies during delivery. Delivery
complications such as these have not been found in cats placed on
raw food.

When deficiency is produced in kittens, it cannot be reversed even
under intense therapy. A well developed cat can be maintained in a
healthy state on deficient food if thyroid and adrenal hormones are
added to her diet. A deficient kitten, even if given raw food, thyroid
and adrenal hormones, does not appear to become a normal cat.

One of the earliest defects noticed in the cats on cooked food is
poor dentofacial development. Defects include: (1) a lessening of the
anterior-posterior and transverse diameters of the dental arch; (2) an
apparent alteration of the angle of the corpus of the mandible to the
ramus; (3) an apparent failure in the anterior development of the for-
ward movement of the face; (4) a lessening in the development of the
frontal sinuses; and (5) an increase in the angle formed by the roof of
the mouth and the base of the brain.

The temporary teeth of both cats fed cooked foods and those fed
raw foods seem well developed; however, when the permanent in-
cisors displace the temporary ones, the cats on cooked food usually
develop three or four irregularly spaced, uneven, crowded incisors
instead of the usual six. This is true of both the upper and lower
jaws. Decrease in the size and increase in irregularity of their teeth
leads to malalignment and poor occlusion.

Diet definitely affects the mineralization of the bones. Analysis of
the femurs at autopsy discloses that the calcium content of bones
diminishes progressively from the first deficient generation to the
third, ranging between [2 and seventeen percent in the first generation to
between 11/ to three percent in the third. Phosphorus content of the
bones also diminishes proportionately with deficiency. Deficient cats
may have a longer shaft with a thinner than normal cortex. Their
bones may be soft, spongy and porous and show an apparent
hyperplasia of the connective tissue cells in the bone marrow with
lessening of the density of the bony trabeculae. These animals may
show varying degrees of anemia. Disturbances of mineralization are
transmitted from an afflicted mother cat to her offspring in an inten-
sified form.

Deficient cats exhibit progressive allergic symptoms from genera-
tion to generation. They show most of the common respiratory,
gastrointestinal and constitutional problems as well as various skin
disorders. Their fur shows inferior quality and their dispositions are
much more nervous and irritable than those of normal cats.
Hypothyroidism is prevalent and contributes to marked disturbances
in the osseous development of some deficient cats and to apparent
disturbances in their reproductive efficiency.

Cats can be so reduced in vitality by just one year of a diet con-
sidered adequate for human consumption that it may take them from
two to three years to recover from the injury, if they can recover at
all. 
If mother cats produce normal healthy kittens much can be done
either to maintain their state of health or to reduce it to one of defi-
ciency during the normal nursing period. The deficiency produced in
a nursing kitten with healthy lineage cannot match the deficiency
produced in a kitten born of a deficient mother during the nursing
period. Milk produced by a deficient mother lacks the nutrients
necessary for her kittens’ normal growth and development and its
deficiency in these nutrients reinforces the deficiency already present
in her kittens at birth. On the other hand, if such deficient kittens are
given adequate feedings during the nursing period, much can be done
to improve their general condition. It is our overall experience that
any female cat that cannot nurse is deficient just as any female cat
that has too much milk is deficient.

The elements in raw food which activate and support growth and
development in the young appear easily altered and destroyed by
heat processing and oxidation. What are these vital elements? Their
nature is not known at this time. We do know that ordinary cooking
denatures proteins rendering them less easily digested. Probably cer-
tain albuminoids and globulins are physiologically destroyed. All
tissue enzymes are heat labile and so destroyed. Vitamin C and some
members of the B complex are injured by the process of cooking and
minerals are made less soluble by altering their physiochemical state.
It is possible that the alteration of the physiochemical state of foods
may be all that is necessary to make them deficient for the
maintenance of healthy cats.
Now, how about humans?

Which are Girls and Which are Boys?


ANSWER: Numbers one and four are boys, numbers two and three are girls.
Ages are between fifteen and seventeen years.

