
Chapter Six
ALLERGIES AND THYROID DEFICIENCY
“‘Non Specific Methods for the Treatment of Allergic States,’’ ‘‘The In-
fluence of Heat Labile Factors on Nutrition in Oral Development and
Health,’’ ‘Effect of Heat Processed Foods and Metabolized Vitamin D
Milk on the Dentofacial Structures of Experimental Animals”’

Normal cats on a raw food, cod liver oil diet show no evidence of
allergy or hypothyroidism; and their offspring, generation after
generation, show no evidence of allergy or hypothyroidism. The in-
cidence of these deficiency problems corresponds with the introduc-
tion of cooked foods.

Allergies

In giving cats cooked meat and milk, they develop all kinds of
allergies. They sneeze, wheeze and scratch. They are irritable, ner-
vous and do not purr. First deficient generation allergic cats produce
second generation kittens with greater incidence of allergies, and by
the third generation, the incidence is almost one hundred percent. When se-
cond generation allergic animals are bred after being returned to an
optimum raw food diet, their allergic symptoms begin to diminish
and by the fourth generation, some cats show no evidences of
allergy. See Table VII.

One allergic cat reveals a condition analagous to the human
disease pruritis ani, intense itching around the anus. In seeking relief,
this animal rubs most of the fur off its buttocks and its physical an-
tics leave little doubt about its extreme discomfort. When milk is
removed from the cat’s diet, the allergic symptom immediately clears
revealing its specific allergen. Milk allergies prove common among
second and third generation deficient cats and their regenerating
counterparts.

One kitten develops asthma. Unfortunately, the animal dies before
it is fully evaluated and before treatment is initiated. Apparently,
this case of asthma is the first to be reported in the research
literature.



The intestinal tracts of the allergic cats prove particularly
remarkable at autopsy. Measurements of the length of the
gastrointestinal tracts of several hundred normal and deficient adult
cats are compared. The measurement starts at the epiglottis and in-
cludes the esophagus, the stomach, duodenum, jejunum and the col-
on to the rectum. In the average normal cat, the intestinal tract is ap-
proximately forty-eight inches long; in some of the allergic cats, the intestinal
tracts measure as long as seventy-two to eighty inches. These elongated tracts lack
tissue tone and elasticity.

Hypothyroidism

Thyroid deficiency produces marked disturbances in osseous
development. An important physiologic factor in determining the
bone development of infants, and later of adults, is the potency of
the maternal thyroid. A disturbance in the thyroid function of the
mother and/or of her ancestors shows in the anatomy of her young.
Our diagnosis of thyroid deficiency in the female cat is based (1) on
physical characteristics of her kittens such as prominent frontal area
of the skull, small teeth, retracted lower jaw and failure of the
anterior development of the face; and (2) on pathological examina-
tion of the thyroid tissue upon death.

Thyroid is a hormone known to pass from the mother into her
milk and thus into her offspring. Use of supplementary thyroid in
the diet of a nursing mother may produce symptoms of hyper-
thyroidism in her young. Among the nursing mother cats on a raw
meat, raw milk diet, there are no incidences of hypothyroidism
among the kittens. Among the nursing mothers on cooked diets,
there is a significant number of kittens with thyroid deficiency.

Figure 6,1 compares a kitten born of a thyroid deficient mother
with kittens born of raw meat and cooked meat fed mothers. Cat A
(on the right) is a typically healthy male from healthy parents eating
raw meat. He has a large skull, large bones, a large thorax, a large,
Jong body and relatively short legs. His dental arches are broad and
he has excellent teeth which are regular and well spaced.

Cat B (on the left) is born of a mother with a deficient thyroid. The
mother has been on a raw food diet for a year preceding his birth;
however, during the time she was nursing her previous litter, she
developed an abscess which was diagnosed as a thyroid abscess by
the character of some necrotic tissue obtained from the wound. 
This
diagnosis was confirmed at autopsy. Though Cat B is approximately
the same age as Cat A, he shows markedly inferior development.
There is a failure in the development of his face so that his teeth are
crowded and narrow. His skull is smaller, his thorax smaller in
diameter, his body shorter and his legs longer than those of Cat A.
All his soft tissues are inferior meaning that their color is pale rather
than red, that their elasticity is poor, that the muscle tone is poor and
that the fat is watery and white. As is typical of cats from
hypothyroid mothers, he shows a much lower percentage of calcium
and phosphorus in his femurs.

Cat C (middle) is an animal born of a cooked meat mother and
kept on cooked meat all his life. He has a small skull, very narrow
dental arch, irregular dentition, small body and long legs. He is func-
tionally sterile and all his soft tissues are of very inferior quality.

A general finding in The Cat Study is that a correlation can be
made between hypothyroidism in deficient cats and their lessened
reproductive efficiency. Of the second generation deficient male
cats, eighty-three percent prove to be functionally sterile on pathological examination;
that is they exhibit no spermatozoa. Fifty-three percent
of the females show underdeveloped and infantile ova.

As an example of the bizarre conditions that can be produced by
long use of cooked food and by thyroid deficiency, the following kit-
ten’s history is interesting. The mother of this kitten is fed cooked
meat for eighteen months, placed on raw meat and bred immediately. As
soon as she delivers, she is put back on cooked food. During the nur-
sing period, she develops a thyroid abscess which is confirmed at
autopsy. Of the four kittens born, two die within six weeks, one dies in three
months, and the kitten in this example dies in eight months.

This kitten is named Streamlined because of her peculiar ap-
pearance. Her legs are bowed, her spine is distorted and she develops
a pot belly which nearly reaches the ground. She has a wizzened ap-
pearance and when eight months old, she has the stature of a six
week old kitten. About three months before death, Streamlined
shows signs of paralysis in the left hind leg which increases in severity
until all legs become involved; one week before death, she has several
convulsive seizures.

Her weight at death is one thousand and nine grams. Postmortem examination
reveals an underdeveloped animal with marked rickets, curvature of
the spine and a rachitic rosary of the ribs. The bladder is enormous,
measuring 2,5 x 3,5 x one inch, and contains one hundred and ten cubic centimeters of
urine. The urine accounts for more than ten percent of the cat’s
weight. The bladder has pushed the intestines to the right side of the
abdominal cavity to reveal a greatly enlarged colon. The femurs are
soft and spongy and contain almost no cortex. Analysis of one of
them shows that it contains 4,77 percent calcium and 2,42 percent
phosphorus. This is sixty percent below normal for the age of the cat.
