
Chapter Two

THE RAW MEAT VERSUS COOKED MEAT
FEEDING EXPERIMENT
“The Effect of Heat Processed Foods and Vitamin D Metabolized Milk on
the Dentofacial Structures of Experimental Animals,’’ ‘Heat Labile Fac-
tors Necessary for the Proper Growth and Development of Cats,’’ ‘‘Clinical
and Experimental Evidence of Growth Factors in Raw Milk,’’ ‘‘The In-
fluence of Heat Labile Factors on Nutrition in Oral Development and
Health”

In this feeding experiment one group of cats receives a diet of 7/3
raw meat, 1/3 raw milk and cod liver oil. The second group receives
2/3 cooked meat, 1/3 raw milk and cod liver oil. Comparisons are
made between the two groups on the basis of their growth, skeletal
development, dentofacial structures and dental health, the calcium
and phosphorus content of their femurs at death, their resistence to
infections, their allergic sensitivity and their reproductive efficiency
(reproductive efficiency as used by Dr. Pottenger means the ability
of the female cat to become pregnant, deliver and nurse viable off-
spring).

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
Raw Meat Group

The cats fed a diet of % raw meat, 1/3 raw milk and cod liver oil
show striking uniformity in their sizes and their skeletal
developments. From generation to generation they maintain a
regular, broad face with prominent malar and orbital arches, ade-
quate nasal cavities, broad dental arches and regular dentition. The
configuration of the female skull is different from the male skull and
each sex maintains its distinct anatomical features. The membranes
are firm and of good, pink color with no evidence of infection or
degenerative change. 


Tissue tone is excellent and the fur of good
quality with very little shedding noted. In the older cats, particularly
the males engaging in fighting, the incisors are often missing, but in-
flammation and disease of the gums is seldom seen.

The calcium and phosphorus content of their femurs remains con-
sistent and their internal organs show full development and normal
function. Over their life spans, they prove resistent to infections, to
fleas and to various other parasites, and show no signs of allergies.
In general, they are gregarious, friendly and predictable in their
behavior patterns, and when thrown or dropped as much as six feet to
test their coordination, they always land on their feet and come back
for more ‘‘play.’”’ These cats reproduce one homogeneous generation
after another with the average weight of the kittens at birth being 119
grams. Miscarriages are rare and the litters average five kittens with
the mother cat nursing her young without difficulty.

Cooked Meat Group

The cats fed a diet of ¥/ cooked meat, ¥/ raw milk and cod liver oil
reproduce a heterogeneous strain of kittens, each kitten in a litter be-
ing different in size and skeletal pattern. When comparing the
changes in configuration found in their X-rays, there are almost as
many variations in the facial and dental structures of the second and
third generation cooked meat fed animals as there are animals.
Evidence of deficiencies is written so plainly on their faces that with a
little training, any observer can be almost certain that a given cat has
been subjected to a deficient diet or that it comes from a line of cats
that has suffered from deficient nutrition.

The long bones of cooked meat cats tend to increase in length and
decrease in diameter with the hind legs commonly increasing in
length over the forelegs. The trabeculation (the internal structural
mesh of the bones) becomes coarser and shows evidence of less
calcium. In the third generation, some of the bones become as soft as
rubber and a true condition of osteogenesis imperfecta is present.

Heart problems; nearsightedness and farsightedness; underactivity
of the thyroid or inflammation of the thyroid gland; infections of the
kidney, of the liver, of the testes, of the ovaries and of the bladder;
arthritis and inflammation of the joints; inflammation of the ner-
vous system with paralysis and meningitis—all occur commonly in
these cooked meat fed cats. A decrease in visceral volume is evidenc-
ed by the diminishing size of their thoracic and abdominal cavities.


Frank infections of the bone appear regularly and often appear to be
the cause of death. By the time the third deficient generation is born,
the cats are so physiologically bankrupt that none survive beyond the
sixth month of life, thereby terminating the strain.

A study of the microscopic sections of the lungs of second and
third generation deficient cats show abnormal respiratory tissues.
The lungs show hyperemia, some edema and partial atelectasis, while
the most deficient show bronchitis and pneumonitis. In several cases,
a hypothyroid condition exists with the thyroid gland showing scanty
colloid and small acini, again not observable in raw meat fed cats.

Cooked meat fed cats show much more irritability. Some females
are even dangerous to handle and three are named Tiger, Cobra and
Rattlesnake because of their proclivity for biting and scratching. The
males, on the other hand, are more docile, often to the point of being
unaggressive and their sex interest is slack or perverted. In essence,
there is evidence of a role reversal with the female cats becoming the
aggressors and the male cats becoming passive as well as evidence of
increasing abnormal activities between the same sexes. Such sexual
deviations are not observed among the raw food cats.

Vermin and intestinal parasites abound. Skin lesions and allergies
appear frequently and are progressively worse from one generation
to the next. Pneumonia and empyema are among the principal causes
of death in adult cats while diarrhea followed by pneumonia takes a
heavy toll on the kittens.

At autopsy, cooked meat fed females frequently present ovarian
atrophy and uterine congestion, and the males often show failure in
the development of active spermatogenesis. Abortion in pregnant
females is common, running about twenty-five percent in the first deficient
generation to about seventy percent in the second generation. Deliveries
are generally difficult with many females dying in labor. The mor-
tality rate of the kittens also is high as the kittens are either born dead
or are born too frail to nurse. Following delivery, a few mother cats
steadily decline in health only to die from some obscure physiological
exhaustion in about three months. Other cats show increasing dif-
ficulty with their pregnancies and in many instances fail to become
pregnant. The average weight of the kittens born of cooked meat fed
mothers is one hundred grams, nineteen grams less than the raw meat nurtured kit-
tens.



Figure 2.1 shows a cat that has been on a cooked meat diet for over
a year. She delivers six kittens, two of which she eats on the first day. She
shows no inclination to care for the remaining. Upon examination, it
is found that she is unable to nurse her kittens because her mammary
glands present no evidence of preparation for lactation. The four kit-
tens are placed on dropper feedings of cow’s milk on the second day.
Three die of diarrhea on the third day. The fourth is placed with the
lactating cat shown in Figure 2.2, but it dies on the fourth day in
spite of every attempt on the part of the foster mother to care for it.

Figure 2.2 shows a raw food fed mother and her four kittens born
the day before the ill-fated kittens above. The mother cat is eleven mon-
ths old and has been fed raw meat, raw milk and cod liver oil since
the age of two months. She delivers six kittens, losing two on account of
her failure to rupture the amniotic sac in time. She has large mam-
mae and has no difficulties in nursing her young. Her kittens have
broad faces and show excellent skeletal development.


Regenerating Cats

When cats of the first and second generation cooked meat fed
groups are returned to a raw meat diet, they are classified as
regenerating animals of the first and second orders. Their progeny
are then maintained on an optimum diet to measure the time needed
to rebuild their health to that of the normal cats. It requires approx-
imately four generations for either order to regenerate to a state of
normal health. However, because of the lack of reproductive effi-
ciency, very few deficient animals regain the normal health noted
before deficiency was imposed on their line of cats.

Improvement in resistance to disease is noted in the second genera-
tion regenerating cat, but allergic manifestations persist into the
third generation. In the third generation, skeletal and soft tissue
changes are still noticeable, but to a lesser degree; and by the fourth,
most of the severe deficiency signs and symptoms disappear—but
seldom completely.

One of the experiment’s more startling discoveries is that once a
female cat is subjected to a deficient diet for a period of twelve to 18
months, her reproductive efficiency is so reduced that she is never
again able to give birth to normal kittens. Even after three or four
years of eating an optimum diet, her kittens still show signs of defi-
ciency in skeletal and dental development. When her kittens are
maintained on an optimum diet, a gradual reversal and regeneration
takes place.

VARIATION—RAW MEAT AND COOKED
MEAT ALTERNATED

In this experiment, one group of cats is fed raw meat, placed on a
diet of cooked meat for six months and then returned to a raw meat
diet. (The six month exposure to cooked food is timed to correspond
to the human teenage years.) When a female cat on this alternated
diet becomes pregnant, her kittens exhibit some deficiency symptoms
although she may appear in good health. Her succeeding litters show
irregularities that tend to lessen in intensity for the first two or three
years of her reproductive life and then increase again. As long as her
kittens receive the optimum raw diet, their health improves;
however, when they are given cooked meat for a period of time, their
resistance to disease greatly diminishes only to improve when they
are returned to the raw meat diet. These raw meat, cooked meat fed
cats partially maintain their skeletal structures from generation to
generation, but their calcification continues to diminish; and their
reproductive efficiency is injured from the standpoints of the size
and the vitality of their kittens and of the failure of their litters to
conform to a homogeneous pattern.
