
Part Two
eye
Human Nutrition
Chapter Eight
HUMAN NUTRITION
“Which Are Girls and Which Are Boys?’’ ‘‘Does Social Practice Alter
Man’s Nutrition?’’ ‘‘Dietary Rehabilitation of the Mal-Nourished,’’
“Metabolic Factors of Development as Related to Physical Fitness’’

The pictures on the previous page were shown at one of the
American Medical Association Conventions. Physicians, nurses and
educators participated in the quiz and their answers were roughly
tabulated as follows: twenty percent of the physicians identified all four
pictures correctly; thirty percent of the nurses; and fifty percent of the
educators. The overall average was thirty percent.

Experimental work with animals shows a loss of-secondary sexual
characteristics after two or three generations on impoverished diets.
Males lose their heavy masculine frame and their general contour
begins to resemble the female. Females also tend to lose their
distinguising build so that both sexes approach a state of physical
neutrality. The male no longer has the strength of body that normal-
ly makes him the breadwinner and dominant personality. The female
no longer has the pelvic capacity required for easy childbearing.

Observation of our young people reveals that humans are sub-
jected to the same food deficiencies as are seen in The Cat Study.
Foods have been progressively depleted of nutritional substances
since the roller flour mill was invented right after the Civil War. Can-
ning, packaging, pasteurizing and homogenizing—all contribute to
hereditary breakdown.

Nutrition and Diet

Nutrition and diet are words with different meanings. Nutrition
means the total of the metabolic processes supporting life, prenatal
and postnatal. In the broadest sense, human nutrition depends upon
the adequacy of the progenitors, the quality of the food, the climate,
the emotional makeup and education, as well as upon the illnesses
and stresses an individual sustains during his growing years. Diet
refers to specific nutrients or foods eaten by an individual.

There is a trend in social thinking to advocate the equalization of
the mass diet. Food provided in quantity by new agricultural
technology is assumed to be of adequate nutritional quality.
However, the long-term effects of synthetic chemicals in animal
feeds, of hormones to stimulate growth and of pesticides for sanita-
tion have not been determined. That their use helps produce foods
which are beautiful in appearance and free from pest damage cannot
be disputed, but that these foods are nutritionally adequate can be.
In a similar vein, we are assessing the effects of air and water pollu-
tion on human nutrition.

Now, what are some of the indications that the average human diet
is deficient? Surface indices easily recognized by a large portion of
our population are: thin, splitting, peeling nails due to disturbance in
protein assimilation, especially lysine; thin skin due to lack of fat, or
the reverse, thick skin, which cannot be picked up between the
fingers due to lack of iodine, or to excessive carbohydrate intake;
and dry, brittle, lack-laster hair caused by too little unsaturated fatty
acid. Moreover, a poorly nutritioned individual is apt to be irritable
and unpredictable without cause. Exhaustion, in varying degrees, is a
universal symptom of deficiency.

Less apparent indices of deficient nutrition relate to the develop-
ment of the bones and ligaments as well as dentofacial structures.
Following chapters will discuss deficiencies in osseous and den-
tofacial structures. Here, we will concentrate on ligaments and
joints. Signs of poor ligaments due to deficient nutrition can be seen
from infancy on. The signs are: hyperextensile elbow joints, hyperex-
tensile shoulder joints, hyperextensile knee joints with lateral play,
wrist bones that can be pulled apart, waddling roll to the hips, weak
ankles and dynamically and statically flat feet.

A trained medical examiner can readily pick up these conditions
on physical examination. 
Later, X-rays reveal these problems more
clearly. By the time the bones and cartilages of the joints are com-
pletely developed, malalignments become obvious.

The following two cases seen in our clinic give an overall view of
the healthy maturing child and of the deficient maturing child. The
outlines given are very broad, but they indicate a general pattern that
is repeated over and over again.

The first case involves a young man born to a mother who has a
relatively uneventful pregnancy. Much of her diet is home grown and
she has excellent health and maintains normal activity throughout.
The young man is born with good strong ligaments and has good
osseous centers of compact bone. During his childhood his food in-
take is nutritionally optimal and he continues to develop good bones,
strong muscles and tight ligaments. Accordingly, his coordination is
excellent. By six to nine months, he can hold his weight on a bar and
before a year, he can chin. His chest is broad and his lungs have good
air capacity. His endurance is good and he is not prone to infections
or to the usual chronic childhood illnesses. Moreover, he has quite a
sunny disposition.

He does suffer a metabolic upset from measles at age 1# which
leaves scars on his bones that take three years to heal, but there are
no residual effects. On entering school, he rarely misses a day; he is a
good student and participates willingly in sports and games. As the
years pass he becomes known for his athletic superiority and proves
to be a champion in high school and in college. At every level of
development, his coordination remains superior to others due to his
excellent ligamentous and osseous development; in fact, his
ligaments and joints mature slightly in advance of the average. The
young man generally has a record of an all-around achiever with the
social popularity and esteem that go with such a record.

The second case involves a young man born to a mother who is
fraught with severe metabolic problems before and throughout her
pregnancy. Her diet is deficient in raw and fresh factors and high in
denatured protein and carbohydrate. The young man is born with
weak ligaments and porous bones. Raised on a deficient diet, he
passes through a series of metabolic upsets starting with poor
assimilation of his formula and continuing with frequent colds,
bouts of asthma and numerous injuries due to poor coordination.
His ligaments are weak and his joints hyperextend.





This boy shuns physical activity and has to be forsed to participate 
in school sports by his teachers and coaches. He shows no particular
interest in his school work and spends most of his time tinkering with
hot rods. When he reaches his teens, his ligaments remain lax, his
muscles weak and his bones soft. He remains accident prone, but
now with automobiles as well as with physical activities. In general,
he is slow to mature, keeps a high soprano voice until he is fifteen and has
many social problems of maladjustment.

Our clinical experience demonstrates that it is perfectly possible
for a child to improve his physical fitness, tighten his ligaments,
strengthen his muscles and harden his bones. It also demonstrates
that as a child’s health and well-being improve, his activity level im-
proves and many academic and social ‘‘problems’’ begin to resolve.
But before these improvements can occur, he must be placed on an
optimal nutritional program.
