
Chapter Ten
EXPERIMENTAL AND CLINICAL EVIDENCE OF THE
VALUE OF RAW MILK
“Clinical and Experimental Evidence of Growth Factors in Raw Milk,’’
“Clinical Evidence of the Value of Raw Milk,”’ ‘‘A Fresh Look at Milk”’

To the bacteriologist, milk has been a source of much inquiry
because of its great potential as a culture medium for all kinds of
bacteria. Those who work with milk are familiar with the difficulty
of sterilizing it. Each form of life has its own thermal death point.
Some are high, some are low. They differ in different media. While
the death point of a bacterium in the dry may be one temperature, in
a colloidal medium like milk, it may be another and in aqueous solu-
tion, still another.

The destruction of bacteria in milk by heat processing is assumed
to be essential in preventive medicine because of the findings of
Pasteur. However, there are many good properties of milk which
also are affected by heat-processing because the entire phys-
iochemical state of the milk is altered. Colloids are precipitated and
mineral salts thrown out. Hormones including thyroid, insulin and
adrenal steroids are affected as well as enzymes essential to efficient
metabolism. Minerals are rendered less soluble. Antibodies giving in-
fants immunity to disease are affected. Though the destruction of
these substances in pasteurization may not produce death as hostile
bacteria may, their deficiency in milk may impair the life-long health
of a child. This may be shown in poor skeletal development, lower
resistance to disease or in degenerative problems such as allergy and
arthritis.

Health officials can no longer in good conscience ignore the
possibility that pasteurization of milk may be menacing the proper
growth and development of many more individuals than it is protec-
ting. It is time to take a fresh look at milk and milk production, and
at other methods of insuring its quality and safety.

Oscar Erf of Randleigh Farm

A fresh look at milk was given by a unique man of action, Oscar
Erf of Randleigh Farm. Erf wanted to find out why the bones of his
high producing Jersey cows were becoming soft and arthritic so that
the animals had to be slaughtered. Collecting a group of scientists
and ecologists of varying disciplines to aid him, he set out to gaina
thorough understanding of the biological cycle of soil, plant and
animal life.

Erf and his collaborators wanted to produce the type of environ-
ment necessary for raising the finest cattle in order to produce the
finest milk. These men were imbued with the idea that their efforts
must start with the soil to be certain it would supply the nutrients
needed for growing the best pasture, corn, sprouts and other feed for
the dairy cattle. They tested their progress in feed improvement and,
thus, in soil improvement, by giving the resulting cow’s milk to
laboratory animals.

Their experiments with feeds ran the gamut of freezing, drying,
curing and adding chemicals to preserve the maximum amount of
vital elements in the hay and other feeds needed for the winter mon-
ths. They discovered the desirability of preserving the optimum
amount of grass juice and fresh factors in the feed just as we
discovered in our cat and guinea pig experiments. Specifically, they
sprouted corn during the winter to provide the freshness factor as
well as vitamins and enzymes. They even used ultraviolet lamps to ir-
radiate the cattle to give them a greater amount of short rays. Their
single purpose was to study the effects of the various dietaries on the
health of the cows and on the health of laboratory animals fed their
milk.

Seeking to add to their cows’ contentment, they employed the
radio, the exercise wheel and other innovations. They placed small
amounts of nitrogen and carbon dioxide in their automatic milking
system to prevent oxidation of the milk. Sanitation was given top
priority, and bacteriological studies were continually made to assure
the purity and safety of the milk.

Erf’s concept of quality control has given way to the concept of
quantity production in our American society. Health experts spend
their time trying to explain that one bottle of milk is just as good as
another; that the meat from one steer, though it may taste different-
ly, has identical food value to that of another.


At the same time, it is
common to hear milk attacked as a cause of many human ailments
such as high cholesterol, arteriosclerosis, pyorrhea and allergy. It
must be asked: ‘‘Is it possible that a food that has nurtured man
since the earliest agrarian times has suddenly become harmful to
him?”

Erf’s answer to this question is very simple: When the nutrition of
cows is poor, the nutritional value of their milk is poor. Through his
research, he was convinced that milk can only be as health giving as
the health of the cow producing it; consequently, when cow’s milk is
deficient in trace elements important for proper metabolism, faulty
metabolism will occur in the consumer—animal or man. Erf con-
sidered that imposed faulty metabolism is the cause of deficiency
problems and proposed that an allergic cow produces an allergic
human being.

High Cholesterol and Other Problems

To the specific charges that milk causes high cholesterol, pyor-
thea, arthritis and allergies, our own research suggests the following
answers:

Cholesterol: The specific charge that milk produces high

cholesterol in humans is largely based on the premise that the inges-
tion of cholesterol and the deposit of cholesterol are the same. The
biochemist, using tracer elements, has been unable to show that the
ingestion of cholesterol will elevate cholesterol in the body. Extensive
use of quality raw milk, cream and farm eggs with tuberculous pa-
tients at the sanatorium failed to produce a single case of hyper-
cholesterolemia and atheroma. A life-time consumption of clean,
fresh raw milk from healthy cattle does not produce metabolic
diseases in man. Cholesterol is not the villain; the villain is what man
does to his cattle and milk.

Pyorrhea and Arthritis: Experiments initiated by Erf show that
pasteurized milk produces pyorrhea in cats and imperfect develop-
ment of rat incisors. Our own research on cats shows that poor quali-
ty and heat processed milks cause osteoporosis and certain types of
arthritis in cats and rats. Such deficiency diseases can be traced back
to deficiencies of fresh, vital elements found in raw foods in the
dietary.

Allergies: As indicated by Erf, methods of processing and preserv-
ing foods enter into the problem of digestion and immunity.

The digestive mechanisms, both enteral and cellular, permit infants,
children and adults to become sensitive when elements controlling
the permeability of cells are altered. The heat-processing of foods
destroys elements which protect us from digestive and im-
munological problems. Some individuals who become sensitized to
subquality milk can never be desensitized, and milk should be remov-
ed from their diet. This does not mean that milk should be
downgraded as a nonessential food. Optimum raw milk is one of the
best and cheapest foods available for infants and children. Emphasis
should return to improving the quality of the milk produced so that it
won’t be lacking in the essential substances which insure proper
assimilation and protect against allergy.

The ideas that animals producing food for man should be healthy
in their domesticated environment and that this imposed environ-
ment should be designed to provide optimum health for man are lost.
In our fear of meeting hard challenges successfully, we are burying
our heads in the sand and ignoring the fact that our modern methods
of production may be rendering valuable foods dangerous. We can-
not afford to pasteurize milk if it is found that pasteurization
diminishes the potency of the growth promoting factors that deter-
mine the skeletal development of our children. We cannot afford to
lessen the resistance of our children to respiratory infection, asthma,
bronchitis and the common cold. Essential minerals, fats, proteins,
hormones, enzymes and antibodies—all present in the finest raw
milk—promote good health among young and old alike. If we are to
practice true preventive medicine and optimize the health of the
human race, we must take the necessary steps not only to insure the
safety of the milk, but to insure its nutritional value.
