
Chapter Seventeen
THE HIGH PROTECTIVE DIET
“The Importance of a Vital, High Protective Diet in the Treatment of
Tuberculosis and Allied Conditions, ’’ ‘The Patient Manual’’
The food habits of our population have undergone a marked
change in the last decades. The amount of carbohydrate consumed
has been increasing steadily with subsequent decrease in the con-
sumption of fats and protein, particularly the latter. People have
become vitamin conscious and in trying to obtain the necessary
amounts of these compounds have neglected other food elements
which are essential.
How many people are aware that a high caloric intake is essential
for maintaining body equilibrium? This is a fact that is not em-
phasized while the fact that sugar and starches give quick energy is
receiving undue emphasis. From the standpoint of energy, proteins
have the highest specific dynamic action. Gram for gram, fats fur-
nish two and one-quarter times as much energy as carbohydrates.
The High Protective Diet we give our patients is one part protein,
one part fat and one part carbohydrate. There are four principles to
this diet:
1 The food is altered as little as possible by the use of minimal
temperatures in cooking.

2 The vitamins are obtained from foods naturally rich in them.

3 Minerals are supplied by the use of relatively crude foodstuffs
and by a mineral salt preparation.

4 Gelatin, a hydrophilic colloid, is used as a regular part of the
diet because it aids digestion.

For the average adult, the diet is planned to provide two hundred and twenty-five grams
each of protein, fat and carbohydrates. The carbohydrates recom-
mended here are in whole grains, unrefined sweets, the starches of
vegetables and in meats. For children, cut down the portions and
give second helpings rather than overwhelming them with one large
serving.

Basic Instructions

1 Cook in stainless steel, enamel-ware, iron-ware or glass. Do not
use pressure cookers.

2 Use drinking water liberally. Estimate the total intake of fluids
per day at one pint to twenty pounds of body weight for adults.

3 Use the mineral salt mixture for table salt.

4 Use a variety of spices for food interest, for stimulating the ap-
petite and for gastric juices.

5 Use gelatin three times a day. (See Recipe A)

6 Use animal fats, lard and meat drippings, instead of vegetable
fats.

7 Use butter, not substitutes.

8 Pickle your foods. The use of vinegar and pickles in hot weather
helps counteract ill effects of heat and also aids in maintaining
good gastric acidity.

9 When children are old enough to have a general diet, allow them
to have pickles.

10 Use soups daily. (Recipe F)
Breakfast pattern:
Sliced orange or half of grapefruit
4 prunes or figs
1 glass of whole raw milk
1 glass gelatin drink
1 cup coffee or tea (adults)
Bacon or ham, with egg or lamb chop
1 bowl of whole grain hot cereal with cream and without
sugar
Luncheon pattern:
Hot soup (if hot vegetable soup, serve the soup meat as well)
One of the variety meats (if soup meat is not served) (8 oz.)
Generous portion of mixed green salad
One hot vegetable
1 glass of milk
1 glass of gelatin drink
1 serving of whole grain bread with butter
Dessert.

Dinner pattern:
Raw beef hors d’ oeuvres (three times weekly)
Plain hot soup, such as chicken broth or bouillon
Roast or other cut of meat (8 0z.)
Green salad (mixed green, if this has not been served at noon)
2 hot vegetables, one of which is yellow
1 glass milk
1 glass gelatin drink
Dessert
Note: The luncheon and dinner patterns are somewhat inter-
changeable. Where meat substitutes, such as dried beans and cheese,
are planned, make sure to add additional proteins such as left-over
meats, eggs or fish.
Milk and Dairy Products
1 Use clean, unprocessed milk. Know your dairy and the health
record of the herd. If you do not, buy certified milk which must
meet the highest state and county safety requirements.
2 Use unprocessed cheeses. Use no renovated cheeses.
Eggs
1 Use fertile eggs of hatching quality for eating because they con-
tain natural estrogenic substances.
2 Vary the methods of preparation of breakfast eggs to maintain
interest.
Cereals and Breadstuffs
1 Use only whole grain cereals.
2 Use whole grain flour instead of white.
3 Use one teaspoon of unprocessed 100% wheat germ with the
breakfast cereal. Heat-treated wheat germ is of little value.
4 Use whole grain breadstuffs. The best are those you make in
your own kitchen from freshly ground flours.
Beverages
1 For adults, restrict coffee and tea to one cup without sugar at
breakfast time. In problems of asthma, use Postum or other
substitute, reserving coffee for its medicinal value. 
1

If gastric problems are present, eliminate entirely.

2 For both children and adults, use one glass of milk each meal.

3 Avoid soft drinks which are nutritionally valueless, provide ex-
cess calories and endanger the teeth.

Meats

1 Buy only government-inspected meats.

2 Use glandular or variety meats as one-third the necessary pro-
tein.

3 Grind your own beef. Grind only enough for immediate use
since rapid oxidation may cause stomach distress.

4 Use the following meats rare: steaks, lamb chops, leg of lamb,
rib and sirloin tip roasts, fresh ground beef for patties.

5 Fry meats only occasionally. Take care not to heat the fat to
smoking since this causes the formation of chemical compounds
which interfere with digestion.

6 Serve liver prepared according to Recipe B at least three times a
week,

7 Serve brain egg-nog (Recipe C) once or twice a week.

8 Serve pork rarely, except bacon.

9 Serve freshly ground beef (Recipe D) three times a week.

10 Use moderate heat for roasting meat, and salt when nearly done.
11 Simmer tough cuts of meat over low heat.

12 Serve fish roe, fish and poultry often.

Vegetables

1 Purchase vegetables the days they are freshly brought to the
market.

2 Wash quickly in running water, dry, store in refrigerator.

3 Use starchy vegetables such as potatoes and sweet potatoes no
more than once a week; bake or steam in the jackets to preserve
the minerals.

4 Use dry beans no more than twice a month. To enhance their
protein value, sprout before cooking. (Recipe G)

5 Consume green leafy vegetables once each day asa salad.

6 Use a yellow vegetable once a day.

7 Cook green vegetables by steaming only until tender, by cooking
in a small amount of water until tender, by sautéing quickly in
butter or drippings. Reserve left-over juices for the soup kettle.
Salt the vegetables after they have cooked, using mineral salt.

8 Use frozen vegetables in preference to canned.

9 Sprout mung beans, alfalfa seeds and other seeds to obtain the
highest vegetable protein. Use them in mixed green salads.
(Recipe G)

Fruits

1 Use fresh fruits in season.

2 Thoroughly wash the skins of apples, pears, and other fruits to
remove as well as possible any sprays. Wash all fruits quickly
and store in refrigerator.

3 Serve citrus fruits whole instead of in juice. When they are
unavailable, serve tomato juice.

4 Serve frozen rather than canned fruits.

5 Serve raw pineapple occasionally.

Desserts

1 Use simple puddings, custard, jello, tapioca, home-made ice
cream, cornstarch pudding, rice custard.

2 Cut down the sugar content to the bare minimum to give flavor.

3 Wherever the molasses flavor is desirable, as in whole grain
steamed puddings, use unsulphured molasses in place of refined
sugar. Use unpasteurized honey in small amounts for sweeten-
ing.

4 Serve fresh fruits in season, taking care that the protein need is
first satisfied. Do not overeat fruits as they are heavy in sugar.

5 Make only those pastries which can be made of whole grain
flours and minimal sweetening.

6 Eliminate candies.

Recipe A — Gelatin

Soak one tablespoon of plain gelatin in a cup with sufficient water
to cover. Dissolve in a hot liquid such as soup, or hot water with fruit
flavoring, or hot water in which a beef cube has been dissolved.

Serve this faithfully with each meal.

Recipe B — Liver

Wash liver in cold water; dry on soft paper. Remove skin and
tough fibers with a very sharp knife. Freeze. If the liver is light col-
ored or spongy, discard, since it is unfit for eating.

Grate two tablespoons of the frozen liver, stir it quickly into a
glass of cold tomato juice, season with catsup, horseradish or other
seasoning, salt and pepper, and consume at once.

This raw liver cocktail may be consumed in mid-morning, mid-
afternoon, or as part of the meal.

A good variation of the raw liver is a cocktail, served as one would
serve a fish cocktail: dice two ounces of liver into very small cubes, mix
with slivers of green onion and diced celery, dress with well-seasoned
mayonnaise in which a spoonful of cocktail sauce has been stirred,
garnish with a slice of lemon.

Recipe C — Brains

Wash brains in cold water, remove membranes, rinse and freeze.
Grate three tablespoons of the brains on a very fine grater; beat the yolk
of one egg with three ounces of 50-50 cream, add brains, season with a
pinch of salt, %4 teaspoon of vanilla, and fold in the stiffly beaten
egg white. Sprinkle nutmeg on the top. Serve before bedtime as a
night-cap.

Use raw brains in salad:

1c, hot water Y/2 c. cold water

1 tbsp. gelatin one c. lime or lemon juice

1 tbsp. honey one set of cleaned brains
Place hot water in blender. Put lid on blender, turn on, and carefully
add gelatin while running. Add honey, lime juice and cold water.
Pour gelatin mixture into mold. Cut brains in half-inch pieces with
scissors. Add to gelatin mixture after it cools. Chill until set, slice
and serve on lettuce with mayonnaise.

Scrambled brains:

1 set of brains two tbsp. chopped parsley

1 tbsp. butter salt

4eggs two tbsp. milk
Parboil brains gently. Drain. Sauté gently in butter until browned.
Add eggs to milk and beat, lightly scramble, and garnish with
parsley.


Recipe D — Fresh Ground Beef

Grind two tablespoons of fresh beef with a little of its fat, spread on
Rye-krisp or other breadstuff, salt and pepper, and use as an hors
d’oeuvre at least three times a week.

Recipes E— Variety Meats Other Than Liver and Brains

Sweetbreads: Soak fresh sweetbreads in cold water with one
tablespoon of vinegar for half an hour. Parboil gently for 20
minutes; remove membranes when cool.

When thus prepared, sauté lightly in butter, or make a medium
white sauce with corn-starch, cover with buttered crumbs, bake until
heated through in the oven.

Kidneys: Trim, cut kidneys in half, remove white tubes, and soak
in salted water for an hour.

When so prepared, use any favorite kidney recipe of your own or
one of the following:

Kidney Sauté:

1 beef kidney

I slice of ham

2 medium onions
Brown ham. Cut kidney into one inch squares. Drop into briskly
boiling water for one minute; drain and rinse. Roll in whole wheat
flour, salt and pepper. Quickly fry with sliced onions and serve with
the ham, piping hot.

Steak and Kidney Pie: Clean kidneys as directed above; cut into
cubes, place in kettle of cold water, bring to a boil, discard water,
and repeat a second time. Meanwhile, cut one pound of steak into 1%
inch cubes, dredge with whole wheat flour, season with salt and pep-
per, and brown in heavy iron kettle in / c. butter or drippings. Add
chopped onions, one tsp. Worcestershire Sauce, cover with cold water,
add kidneys, and simmer gently about two hours. Add liquid as needed,
and stir to prevent sticking. Pour into casserole, top with a flaky
crust made of whole wheat pastry flour, bake quickly and serve very
hot.

Heart: Cut out tough fibers, wash thoroughly in cold water.

Sautéed Heart: Slice calf’s heart into one inch slices cross-wise.
Roll in whole wheat flour, season with salt and pepper. Brown as you
would chicken. Cover with cold water and simmer gently until
tender. Add onion for flavor.

Baked Stuffed Heart: After cleaning beef heart, simmer for 2
hours in salted water. Prepare a bread stuffing, stuff the boiled heart
and skewer together. Roll in whole wheat flour, brown in bacon fat,
place in covered casserole. Add a small amount of water to pan in
which heart was browned, pour it over the heart, and bake slowly in
moderate oven until tender.

Tripe: Select pickled or fresh tripe which has already been cooked,
or simmer uncooked tripe, thoroughly washed, for six hours or until
tender. Let cool in broth.

Fried Tripe: Cut cooked tripe into serving pieces. Dip in egg and
crumbs and allow to dry before frying. Brown nicely in bacon fat
and serve very hot.

Savory Tripe: Cut prepared tripe into inch squares, add onions,
carrots, celery, bay leaf, pepper-corns, a tablespoon of Worcester-
shire Sauce, and simmer about twenty-five minutes.

Recipe F — Soup

1, Once each week, make a large kettle of soup stock. Use plenty of
bones, such as shank and knuckle, which should be split and the
marrow browned, with whatever meat is used—shank, short-
ribs, ox-tail, lamb trimmings or any inexpensive cut of meat.
Cover the bones and meat with cold water, let stand for an hour
before beginning to simmer. To extract the calcium from the
bone, add % cup of vinegar, and sufficient salt to flavor.
Simmer until the meat falls from the bone. The browning of the
meat and marrow will supply a brown color as well as a good
flavor. Strain through a cloth. Cool, skim off the grease which
can be reserved for seasoning. Clear by pouring into the strained
broth two slightly beaten egg whites, the shells, and two tables-
poons of cold water; bring soup to a full boil for five minutes,
and restrain. When cool, store the broth in the refrigerator. As
an introduction to the noon or evening meal, heat sufficient
broth for the one meal, adding vegetable juices or small
amounts of cooked vegetables for variation. Always season the
soup well and serve very hot.

2. Use any of the above meats with some bone to make a kettle of
vegetable soup. When the meat is almost tender, add vegetables
cut rather small, such as celery, onions, turnips, carrots, or any
combination, with a bouquet of herbs, cooking the vegetables
only until tender.

3. Cream soups of any vegetable, using cornstarch or whole wheat
pastry flour to make the thickening, make excellent cool weather
soups.

Recipe G — Sprouting Beans and Grains

Mung bean sprouts: Wash 1/2 c. of seeds, soak over-night. Spread
in the middle of a clean old bath towel, fold over the sides, roll up
loosely, and soak with cold water. Lay on a wire rack over a bowl so
that air circulates freely on all sides. Keep damp by sprinkling.
Sprouts of good growth will be obtained in three — five days. Wash the
sprouts to remove as many hulls as possible, and use the sprouts as
part of a tossed salad. Or combine with meats to make chop-suey.

Use similar treatment on navy or kidney beans. When they are
sprouted, cook them with ham or bacon fat. They will cook in a
much shorter time than unsprouted beans, and will be practically
free of the gas factor.

Alfalfa and clover seeds make excellent sprouts for salad.

There are porous crocks now on the market, with lids, which are
designed for sprouting seeds easily. They eliminate the use of the
towel.
