
Appendix I
Biography of
Francis Marion Pottenger, Jr.

Francis Marion Pottenger, Sr., a native of Ohio, moved to
Monrovia, California in 1895 with his wife, who was suffering from
tuberculosis. He entered into the practice of medicine, but when his
wife’s health failed to improve, he took her back to Ohio where she
died in November of 1898. Returning to Monrovia, he and his two
brothers, Milton and Joseph, opened the Pottenger Sanatorium and
Clinic for Diseases of the Chest with emphasis on the treatment of
tuberculosis in 1903. Convinced that good nutrition formed the basis
for the successful treatment of disease, Francis senior placed a priori-
ty on the quality of food he served at the sanatorium. Most of the
food was grown on the premises, and to insure the best quality milk
and milk products, he worked with the United States Department of
Agriculture to form the first government accredited (free of tuber-
culosis) Holstein herd in California. The sanatorium soon became
recognized internationally for its successful treatment of tuberculosis
and maintained an impeccable reputation until it closed in 1956.
Francis wrote well over 200 books and articles on the treatment of
chest diseases, many of which were used in medical schools
throughout the country.

Francis senior married his second wife, Adelaide Gertrude Babbit
(Kitty), on August 29, 1900. Kitty was a native of Keysville, New
York, and at the time of their courtship was the vice principal and
the teacher of Latin and Greek in the Monrovia High School. The
Babbit family was known for its inventors. One Babbit ancestor in-
vented Babbit metal, an alloy used in the production of bearings.
The metal was developed for the New Haven Railroad in order to cir-
cumvent the British monopoly on replacement parts for their
locomotives. Another Babbit invention was Babbo, a popular
household cleaning agent and the predecessor of today’s Ajax.




Three children were born of the union between Francis and Kitty:
Francis Marion, Jr., on May 29, 1901; Robert Thomas in 1904; and
Adelaide Marie in 1907. The family home, called The Oaks, was
built by W. N. Monroe, the founder of Monrovia. The Oaks was
also a working farm and provided both farming experience for the
children and fresh food for the family table.

Francis Marion Pottenger, Jr., began his schooling at the Wild
Rose Elementary School in Monrovia. Here he made many perma-
nent friends. One was Thomas Myron Hotchkiss, who wrote a
biography of Francis in which he describes Francis’s early inventive
talent. ‘‘When we were boys, ‘Meccano’ sets were all the rage and
Francis had a rather elaborate set. With it he made a working model
of a rock crusher such as were found in the Azusa-Duarte area where
the gravel resources of the San Gabriel River were being exploited by
rock companies. He set his model up in the foyer of the old Wild
Rose School where it was enviously eyed by many of his companions.
Later, with the same set he constructed a working model of a bascule
bridge complete with motor drive. Both models displayed con-
siderable ingenuity in design and construction.”

In his teens, Francis pursued his interest in mechanical and elec-
trical invention by developing a system of tractor drawn, heated meal
carts to deliver hot meals from the sanatorium kitchen to the outly-
ing patient cottages. According to Francis’s diary, he met many
frustrations and spent much time repairing the tractors and carts as
well as overcoming other maintenance problems. His persistence
paid off, however, and his meal delivery system worked and was
used until the closing of the sanatorium.

When Francis finished Wild Rose School, he attended Monrovia
High School, Los Angeles Military Academy, the Claremont School
for Boys (Webb School) and Thatcher in Ojai Valley. This shifting of
schools was due in part to intermittent poor health. During his grow-
ing years, he suffered chronic otitis media and mastoiditis and was
forced to spend two to three months out of every school year in bed.
Prior to entering college, he spent nearly three years in bed, making
Cottage 80 at the sanatorium his home away from home.

Francis’s formal education during this time was largely supervised
by members of his family as well as by tutors. Though he took many
correspondence courses, he became accustomed to a personalized,
Socratic method of learning and maintained a life-long preference
for gaining knowledge by conversing with the experts in his various
fields of interest rather than by reading.


Though his natural inclination was towards engineering, his father
insisted that he become a physician. Accordingly, Francis entered his
father’s alma mater, Otterbein College in Westerville, Ohio, in 1921.
Here he met Teresa Elizabeth Saxour and on the day of their gradua-
tion, June 17, 1925, they were married. Francis proceeded to the Col-
lege of Medicine at the University of Cincinatti, also his father’s
medical school. He received his M.B. in 1929 which allowed him to
practice medicine in Ohio. In 1930, he received his M.D. and began
his internship at the Los Angeles County Hospital.

During these preparatory years at Otterbein and at medical school,
Francis kept extensive notes of his observations and the questions
raised by them. His notebook reveals the wide range of his early in-
trospective searchings:

“Ts it not probable that the fineness of the hair may be an indica-
tion of the thickness of the skin?’’ 3/14/25

“Why is malignancy rare in the duodenum?”’ 1/19/28

“Is hunger caused by the deprivation of body tissues of car-
bohydrates?’’ 1/27/28

“Is it possible that cancer may be produced by intestinal bacteria
which liberate an enzyme that has power to cause the cells of specific
tissues to proliferate—the tissues being in such a state that trauma
starts the proliferation?’”’

His earliest contributions to medical literature appeared in the
Journal of the American Medical Association in November of 1930
when he was still interning at the Los Angeles County Hospital. In
two articles, he describes his inventions of ‘‘Rubber Flask Connec-
tors for Hypodermoclysis, Intravenous Therapy and Other Uses’’
and ‘‘A New Syphon System for Maintaining Continuous Drainage
Without Air Block in Thoracic Emphyemas and in Infections of
Other Body Cavities.’’ The latter system, known as Pottenger suc-
tion, was adopted by the Chest Surgery Section of the Los Angeles
County Hospital and was used for many years until mechanical
pumps came into wide use.

While he was attending medical school, he developed a ‘‘hatred’’
for the way civilized man treated himself and his children. He
wondered why people, so capable of advancing their technology,
failed so miserably in promoting their biological health. 


He felt a
driving need to know and to understand how man could maintain
good health and eliminate chronic illness and so prevent children
from suffering as he had. This missionary zeal led him to direct his
inquiry towards the field of nutrition.

On completing his internship, he became a resident physician at
the sanatorium and in 1931 became a vice president of the corpora-
tion and associate medical director and the director of research for
the Pottenger Sanatorium and Clinic. During the 1930’s, Francis
began his own research into the treatment of tuberculosis and other
respiratory ailments, such as asthma. He became interested in Drs.
Pfiffner and Swingle’s work with adrenal glands and began con-
ducting experiments feeding adrenal hormones to tuberculous guinea
pigs. In 1937, he published a paper with his Uncle Joseph in which he
showed that in 28 percent of the guinea pigs treated with adrenal ex-
tracts, there was no evidence of tuberculosis when they were sacrific-
ed for pathological study.

At this time, he also started a small private practice using the
sanatorium’s facilities, but soon considered the possibility of foun-
ding his own clinic. He did not have to look far for a suitable site. At
the end of the First World War, the Pottenger Sanatorium had been
compelled to expand in order to care for returning veterans with
pulmonary problems from gas poisoning and infection. Several cot-
tages were built off the main grounds, and as the case load of
veterans began to drop, these cottages fell into disuse. Francis pur-
chased them and after extensive remodelling, he opened the Francis
M. Pottenger, Jr., Hospital for the treatment of non-tuberculous
diseases of the respiratory system with a particular emphasis on
asthma. The opening was in 1940 and the 42 bed hospital operated
until 1960.

Continuing his research into the therapeutic use of adrenal hor-
mones, Francis began treating his asthmatic patients with a high pro-
tein diet supplemented by freshly ground adrenal glands. This treat-
ment brought marked improvement to most of his patients and led
him to make a major commitment to the manufacture of his own
adrenal extract known to his patients as ‘‘X06.’’ He designed and
built an extracting and refrigerating facility with a walk-in, room-
sized freezer, one of the first of its kind. His patent for this facility
had nine separate claims.

In the 1930’s and 1940’s, biological extracts were assayed and
standardized by their effects on other biological systems, usually
laboratory animals. Francis used cats to determine the hormone con-
tent of his adrenal extract. 
Removing their adrenal glands, he gave
them supportive doses of his newly manufactured extracts in order to
observe their reactions. Through his observations, he was able to
determine the strength of each batch of extract and to obtain the
necessary uniformity in potency. It was this process of biological
standardization that led to his ten year cat study.

Prior to his death in 1967, Francis was involved in developing
photographic and X-ray equipment capable of giving simultaneous
exposures with an accurate superimposition of the X-ray and
photograph. He planned to investigate the changes in human
anatomy over a span of four generations, roughly from 1900, 1920,
1940 to 1960. The study was to consist of X-rays of the skull, hand,
foot and thorax of 7000 individuals with corresponding an-
thropometric photographs and measurements. His preliminary find-
ings were revealing that dramatic changes had occurred in the
anatomy of the American male from a turn-of-the-century figure
with broad shoulders, stocky neck and narrow hips to a modern
figure with small, weak shoulders, longer neck and broad pelvis. The
reverse development was appearing in the anatomy of the American
female with a 1900 figure showing narrow shoulders and broad pelvis
to a 1960 figure showing broad shoulders and a narrow pelvis.

Francis was among the first in his profession to recognize the
health hazard of air pollution in Los Angeles County. He worked
tirelessly to alert responsible parties to the toxic properties of smog.
As a consequence of his efforts, he was appointed to the Los Angeles
Air Pollution Control District’s Scientific Committee on Air Pollu-
tion and was a member of the Air Pollution Committee of the Col-
Jege of Chest Physicians.

He also was among the first to recognize the hazards of pesticides
to human health. In a paper entitled ‘‘Poisoning from DDT and
Other Chlorinated Hydrocarbon Pesticides,’’ he stated: ‘‘The wide-
spread use of chlorinated hydrocarbons such as DDT in agriculture,
animal husbandry and about the home has been accompanied by a
syndrome of hepatic and neurologic damage and sometimes death.’”
This paper presented the first reported cases of insecticide poisoning.
He defined the symptoms as (1) hyperirritability, anxiety, confusion,
inability to concentrate, forgetfulness as well as slow or racing heart
beats, (2) pathological liver hypertrophy, renal lesions, loss of col-
loid in the thyroid and changes in nerve and skin tissues, and (3) the
presence of insecticide in the body’s fat deposits.

In the 1940’s, Francis became acquainted with Dr. Weston A.Price,
a practicing dentist with a congenial spirit of inquiry. 


In his
desire to explain the prevalence of tooth decay and facial inade-
quacies among his patients and ‘‘civilized peoples,’’ Price set upon a
worldwide odyssey to study the dietary habits of fourteen isolated
and primitive peoples. He found that those natives who still ate their
customary natural foods—whether primarily fish, meat or
vegetable—showed broad facial structures, a ‘‘perfection’”’ to their
dental arches and virtually no tooth decay; while those who had been
exposed to the civilized diet of commerce based on refined white
sugar, white flour, canned and packaged foods, showed narrowing
of their faces, crowding of their teeth and a high incidence of
cavities. They also showed increasing susceptibility to tuberculosis
and other degenerative disease.

Appreciating the importance of Weston Price’s findings and their
confirmation of his own experimental and clinical findings, Francis
became chairman of a committee established for the purpose of
disseminating Price’s work through exhibits, lectures and printed
materials. Later, the Weston A. Price Foundation was organized asa
non profit organization to further this educational purpose. At his
death, Francis’s extensive library of research data, slides, X-ray
studies, papers and articles were entrusted to the foundation by his
family. In response, the Board of Directors changed the founda-
tion’s name to the Price Pottenger Foundation and later to the Price
Pottenger Nutrition Foundation. The foundation now actively
disseminates the work of both men.

During his professional career, Francis wrote many articles which
appeared in different medical publications. Appendix II lists these
papers and articles. One of his favorite, unpublished stories took
place at a nutrition meeting he was attending. A reporter came up to
him and asked, ‘‘Are all these people here interested in nutrition?”

Francis answered, ‘‘Yes.”’

The reporter commented, ‘‘They certainly are not a very healthy
looking crowd.’”

To which Francis replied quizzically, ““Why do you think we are
here?”’.

Francis and Elizabeth had four children: Francis Marion, III,
Margaret Elizabeth, Barbara Jane and Samuel Slatter. Francis II
received his doctorate in education and is presently supervising the
curriculum for the public school system in Hawaii. Margaret is the
owner of two dress stores called the Jabberwocky in Tustin, Califor-
nia. Barbara lives with her lawyer husband, Jim Shumar, in
Whitacre, Virginia. Samuel is deceased.

Francis’s younger brother, Robert Thomas, practiced medicine in
Pasadena, California. In addition to promoting the importance of
optimal nutrition, Robert pioneered clinical research in the area of
food allergy in the treatment and control of arthritis and
rheumatism. The authors of this monograph are the son and
daughter of Robert. Robert Thomas Pottenger, Jr., is a practicing
physician in Pasadena and continues the tradition of his father and
uncle in his own research and clinical practice. Elaine Pottenger is a
writer.

