
Chapter Sixteen
THE VALUE OF RAW FOOD AND GELATIN TO DIGESTION
“Hydrophilic Colloidal Diet’’

Raw food consists largely of hydrophilic colloids which are essen-
tial in the digestive process. Because of the hydration capacity of col-
loids, they absorb digestive juices and so prevent the common
ailments of sour or acid stomach.

The heat used in cooking foods precipitates their colloids, alters
their hydration capacity and interferes with the digestive process.
The amount of interference depends upon the degree of heat used
and upon the specific character of the colloidal medium itself. Cer-
tain colloids will withstand more heat than others; for instance,
cellulose of vegetable origin and certain pectins will stand a greater
temperature without precipitating colloids than proteins of animal
origin.

Any hydrophilic colloid, be it living protoplasm or a mineral jell,
has a specific hydration capacity under given conditions. By varying
the physiochemical condition surrounding a colloid, it can be made
to expand or contract. For instance, if two gelatin squares of similar
weight are immersed in bowls, one containing distilled water, the
other a solution of hydrochloric acid of 1/100 normal concentration,
two things happen. First, the gelatin square in the acid expands at a
much greater rate than the square in the water. Second, the solution
about the square in the acid medium becomes almost the same
hydrogen ion concentration as distilled water. Now, if the acid solu-
tion is made stronger, the gelatin is digested making a colloidal
suspension, and unless too great a concentration of acid is present,
the acidity of the solution approaches neutrality. On the other hand,
gelatin precipitated by heat fails to take up water or acid.

If man did not cook his food, there would be no need for the addi-
tion of any hydrophilic colloid to his dietary. 

Uncooked foods contain sufficient hydrophilic colloids to keep gastric 
mucosa in ex-cellent condition. As we live largely on cooked food, problems arise.
An old description of the stomach contents portrays them in layers,
each layer assuming its position by virtue of its specific gravity: meat
first, then vegetables and fruits, followed by and interspersed with
mashed potatoes, and finally the water layer with its scum of fat. Ac-
cording to this view, these layers churn around in sufficient gastric
juices to digest the meal in one and one-half hours to four hours if all
goes well. If these gastric contents are then removed and examined,
the aqueous layer is strongly acid, though the degree of acidity dif-
fers with the individual.

If we add a hydrophilic colloid of excellent hydration capacity to
the diet portrayed above, a definite change takes place in the
stomach contents. If they are withdrawn for analysis, a gluey mass is
recovered. It is not sour as are the stomach contents without the
gelatin; it does not show any acidity until the colloid is broken down.
Under these conditions, digestion is generally distributed throughout
the mass rather than layered.

When raw fruits and vegetables are eaten, they first absorb the
digestive juices and are partially digested before the gluey mass
develops. Raw meats apparently become gelatinous in less time than
vegetables, but as digestion proceeds, all raw food becomes more or
less gelatinous before liquification takes place. When cooked foods
are eaten, gastric digestion may be interfered with because the heat
of cooking precipitates colloids. Gelatin, because of its availability
and relatively low cost, can act as a supplemental hydrophilic colloid
for dietary usage in combatting disturbances caused by cooked food.
