
Part Three
Chapter Thirteen
RECIPROCAL RELATIONSHIP OF THE HEALTH
OF PLANTS, ANIMALS AND HUMAN BEINGS
“Reciprocal Relationship of the Health of Plants, Animals and Human Be-
ings,”’ ‘The Effect of Heat Processed Foods and Metabolized Vitamin D
Milk on the Dentofacial Structures of Experimental Animals”’

Man is part of a biological cycle. The continued development of
optimum human beings requires that this cycle be maintained. The
soil is the first element in this cycle and is vitalized by the bacteria
which inhabit it. The bacteria provide food for the earthworms
which process the soil through their bodies converting organic matter
into humus, and humus provides food for the growth of plants sup-
porting animal and human life. When the excreta of animals and
humans is returned to the soil, it nourishes the bacteria and so allows
the biological cycle to go on ad infinitum.

That healthy plants are essential to animal life and that animal ex-
crement acts as a soil rejuvenator is widely recognized, but that
possible harm is done to human life when disturbances or deficien-
cies occur in any phase of the biological cycle is not widely recogniz-
ed.

Modern man has gleaned his fields to fill his larder, but his system
of sanitary engineering has destroyed most of the soil rejuvenating,
organic materials. No longer does man return to the soil those
materials taken from the soil. Instead he pours them into the ocean
and loses them to his civilization. Harsh mineral fertilizers, which
destroy soil bacteria and earthworms, are being substituted for the
organic compost of the past to the long-range detriment of the soil at
one end of the biological cycle and of human life at the other.





A chance observation led us to experiment with the growth proper-
ties of the excreta in the pens of the cats on various cooked and raw
diets. As feeding experiments are completed, pens become empty.
Shortly, weeds sprout in them, but with noticeable differences in
their size and health. As can be seen in Figures 131, 132, 133 and
134, the number of weeds in the pens and their hardiness appears to
be in direct relationship to the health and vigor of the animals that
lived in them. Planting navy beans in the pens, we find that the same
growth patterns result. (Table XIII)

We ran a controlled experiment in 1939 to confirm these findings and
another controlled experiment in 1940 to see if there would be any
difference in the fertilizing values of composted manure from
healthy and unhealthy cats.
Navy Bean Experiment — 1939

In this initial experiment, navy beans are planted in three different
plots. The first plot is fertilized with non-composted excreta of cats
fed raw meat.


The second plot is fertilized with non-composted excreta 
of cats fed cooked meat and the third plot is not fertilized.
When the first crop of navy beans is harvested from the three plots,
the beans show no apparent difference in their size, color or shape.
However, when they are planted to produce a second generation,
their germination rates differ. The raw meat plot shows 88 percent
germination, the cooked meat plot shows 72 percent germination and
the unfertilized plot shows 96 percent.

Two weeks after planting, the unfertilized plants are the tallest
while the raw meat and cooked meat plants are about equal in height.
The plants on raw meat fertilizer have the best form and color.

Three weeks after planting, the cooked meat group of plants is the
tallest, the unfertilized group the next tallest and the raw meat group
is the shortest. This rate of growth is exhibited throughout the ex-
periment. The plants on cooked meat fertilizer are pale green in col-
or, have many more stems and leaves and their stalks are thinner
than the plants of the other two groups. 




Plants on raw meat fertilizer
are short and squat, have much deeper color and are sturdier than
the plants on cooked meat fertilizer. The unfertilized plants are in-
termediate between the raw and cooked meat groups with respect to
the above features. The leaves of the plants on cooked meat fertilizer
are flabby and thin and feel much like tissue paper, while those on
raw meat fertilizer are firm and heavy in texture. Those on no fer-
tilizer are a little below the quality of the raw meat fertilized leaves.

One month after planting, all the beans are transplanted to larger
plots. It is found that the roots of the plants on raw meat fertilizer
are at least twice as numerous, tougher and longer than those of the
others. The roots of the unfertilized plants are intermediate, while
those of the cooked meat fertilized plants are few, soft and mushy.

The beans were analyzed for their moisture, ash, calcium and
phosphorus content. The results of the analysis are given in Table
XIV.

Navy Bean Experiment — 1940

The following year, a similar experiment is repeated. The seeds
harvested from the plants fertilized with the excreta of cats fed raw
meat are planted in a plot treated with composted manure from raw
meat fed cats. The seeds harvested from plants fertilized with the ex-
creta of cats fed cooked meat are planted in a plot treated with com-
posted manure from cooked meat fed cats. No fertilizer seeds are
planted again in an unfertilized plot. Two plots are added. One plot
is planted with the seeds of the unfertilized beans in ground fertilized
by the excreta of cats whose main diet consisted of pasteurized milk,
and the other plot is planted with seeds of unfertilized beans in
ground fertilized by the excreta of cats whose main diet was Certified
Raw Milk. This makes five plots in all: (1) raw meat (2) cooked meat
(3) pasteurized milk (4) Certified Raw Milk and (5) unfertilized.

In this experiment the growth of the plants is similar to that of a
year earlier. 


In the two plots fertilized with the excreta of cats on the
milk diets, the beans of the certified Raw Milk group germinate
sooner than the beans from the pasteurized milk group. The beans
grown in the plot fertilized with the excreta of cats fed raw meat pro-
ve more even and regular in contour and in size. Their plants are
sturdier, their color better and the texture of their leaves superior to
any of the other plants.

Raw Meat: These beans have a hard, white surface. Uniformity of
size and plumpness of the beans distinguishes them from the beans of
all other groups.

Cooked Meat: In this group, one-fourth of the brans are shriveled
and yellow in color; the remainder are smooth and white. They also
are more plump than the milk beans, but they are not as plump as the
raw meat beans. They exhibit the peculiar oblong shape of the milk
beans.

Pasteurized Milk: The beans have a hard, smooth white surface.
The most noticeable features are their flatness and oblong shape.

Certified Raw Milk: These beans exhibit the same general features
as those of the pasteurized group.

No Fertilizer: These beans are smooth and white. They are more
plump than either of the milk beans, but not as plump as the meat
beans.

There is a marked variation in the size and weight of the different
groups of beans. Of the pasteurized milk beans, the variation in
weight is from 72,2 mg to 198,3 mg with an average of 117,9 mg. In
the Certified Milk group, the variation is from 74,5 mg to 203 mg
with an average of 121,7 mg. For the raw meat beans, the smallest is
107 mg and the largest 210,4 mg with the average of 166,2 mg. For
the cooked meat, the smallest is 25,8 mg and the largest 209,9 mg
with an average of 146,7 mg. The no-fertilizer beans vary from 63,1
mg to 194,6 mg with an average of 113,5 mg.

A portion of the beans, the dried plants and pods, is subjected to
chemical analysis. 


No definite conclusions can be drawn from this experiment, but it
suggests the possibility that excreta of diseased and healthy animals
contain principles which affect plant growth, and that the health of
the animal determines to some degree the effect on the vitality of the
plant and its seeds as well as the chemical constituents of the plant,
seed and pod of the beans.

