
Part One
eas
Cat Nutrition
Chapter One
THE POTTENGER CAT STUDY
“The Effect of Heat Processed Foods and Metabolized Vitamin D Milk on
Dentofacial Structures of Experimental Animals,’’ ‘‘The Influence of Heat
Labile Factors on Nutrition in Oral Development and Health’’

The cats in The Pottenger Cat Study were kept in large outdoor
pens. The pens were built near a stand of eucalyptus trees on a side of
a hill overlooking the San Gabriel Valley. Each pen had an open air
enclosure 12 feet long, 6 feet wide and 7 feet high which was screened
by chicken-wire so the cats had adequate exposure to the sun. A
trench 18 inches deep was dug in each enclosure and filled with
freshly washed sand from a common sand pile. A roofed area ap-
proximately 4 feet deep with a wooden floor and bedding extended
from the back of each pen to provide shelter for the animals during
inclement weather. A caretaker removed bones and uneaten food
daily, and cleaned and refilled the water containers. Periodically, he
removed the cats’ buried excreta from the sand for composting in
piles marked according to the cats’ diet.

All animals were subject to the same routine procedures. Each cat
had its own clinical chart and notes were kept throughout its life. All
cats were weighed, numbered and described. In the cases of donated
animals, all possible information was obtained from their donors
regarding their histories of development, the types of food they had
received from birth and their general condition of health. The kittens
born of experimental animals were carefully described and their birth
dates and lineage were recorded along with any delivery problems the
mother cat experienced. 


Kittens born dead were subject to immediate 
autopsy and examined for any abnormalities or birth defects either
by the naked eye or through a microscope. Such postmortem ex-
aminations accompanied the death of all cats.

X-ray studies were made of some of the cats in order to study the
effects of the various experimental diets on their skeletal develop-
ment. Moreover, calcium and phosphorus determinations were made
during the postmortem of most of the experimental animals. These
determinations were confined basically to the size and weight of the
femurs and the percentage of calcium and phosphorus in them.

At the end of ten years, 600 out of 900 cats studied had complete,
recorded health histories. The majority of these records are in the ar-
chives of The Price Pottenger Nutrition Foundation.

DEFINITIONS

As The Cat Study includes several generations of cats, it is
necessary to understand how the different generations are classified
before discussing the actual feeding experiments. In classifying the
experimental animals, the word diet describes the actual food intake
of the individual cat. An optimum diet refers to a diet of raw food in-
cluding raw meat, raw milk and cod liver oil. A deficient diet refers
to a diet including one or more cooked foods plus cod liver oil. Cod
liver oil is routinely included in all experimental diets as a rich sup-
plemental source of vitamin A.

According to the diet variables of raw or cooked foods, the cats
are grouped in three general health classifications: (1) Normal, (2)
Deficient, and (3) Regenerating.

Normal Cats

Normal cats are born of healthy parents and are maintained on an
optimum diet of raw food and cod liver oil. They are the control cats
used for comparison with the deficient and regenerating cats. The
breeding males used in the various experiments are always of this
normal group, and are of proven fertility so that experimental results
primarily reflect the condition of the health of the mother cats.



Deficient Cats

First Generation Deficient Cats: These cats are either mature cats
donated to the study or mature cats born of experimental animals
and raised on an optimum diet. When these adult cats are placed on
deficient diets including cooked food, they are called deficient cats of
the first generation.

Second Generation Deficient Cats: These cats are the kittens born
to females of the first deficient generation eating a deficient diet for
various lengths of time prior to and during gestation and lactation.
At the end of nursing, these kittens are maintained on a deficient
diet.

Third Generation Deficient Cats: These cats are the kittens born of
the second deficient generation and maintained on deficient diets all
their lives.

Regenerating Cats

Regenerating Kittens of the First Order: When a female cat of the
first deficient generation is placed back on an optimum raw diet after
giving birth to a deficient litter, her next kittens, benefiting from her
improved diet, are called Regenerating Kittens of the First Order.

Regenerating Kittens of the Second Order: These kittens are born
to a cat of the second deficient generation and placed on an optimum
diet.

There are never more than three generations of deficient cats
because of the third generation’s inability to produce healthy, viable
offspring. Consequently, there are no third or fourth orders of
regenerating cats.
