
Chapter Fourteen.


Chapter Fourteen
FAD DIETS AND OPTIMUM NUTRITION
“What We Know For Sure About An Optimal Diet for Human Beings”’

The World Health Organization defines health as ‘‘a state of com-
plete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the
absence of disease or infirmity.”” The National Research Council
states that if optimum nutrition depends on optimum diet, ‘‘this
becomes distinctly significant if one recognizes that health . . . has
quantitative characteristics involving efficiency, reserves and the
capacity not only to avoid diseases but to attain maximum inherited
potentialities.’

My own definition of an optimal diet is one which provides man
with the nutrients essential to regenerate his body cells; to enable him
to mature regularly as determined by normal osseous, physical and
mental characteristics; to resist disease; to reproduce his kind in
homogeneity and to enable him to produce a livelihood for himself
and his family.

Healthy human beings have been known to fulfill these standards
on various dietaries: (1) vegetarian with small amounts of eggs, milk,
meat or fish (2) carnivorous including fish, crustacea, mollusks and
small amounts of vegetation and (3) omnivorous including many
combinations of vegetarian and carnivorous foods.

The American people have been great faddists about diet. What
may be a medical necessity for some frequently becomes a fad for
others, not in need of treatment. When I was a child, cod liver oil
was considered essential for all children. The chemist discovered that
other oils contained similar physical properties and the cult of cod
liver oil waned. About the time I entered medical school, salt was
believed to cause high blood pressure and some diets were restricted
in salt; this belief waned only to revive recently. Meanwhile, chemists
were able to concentrate vitamins A and D from fish livers, and
vitamin preparations began their ascendancy and have remained
popular as vitamin after vitamin has been synthesized. When dentists
demonstrated that sugar caused tooth decay, there was a prompt
decline in the use of sugar. 



One of the most recent fads is based on
the assumption that excessive cholesterol is caused by foods in-
cluding animal fat, cream, butter, eggs and by implication, all fats.
Countering this is the discovery that unsaturated fatty acids,
especially those found in vegetable oils and cod liver oil, reduce
cholesterol in the blood stream.

Many women and young girls caught in the web of modern fashion
for the slender silhouette have gone to great extremes in dieting.
Without medical guidance they have undertaken self-imposed diets
providing as little as 700 to 900 calories a day. An alarming number
of them are caught in the vicious circle of low energy, menstrual ir-
regularity, poor skin, nervous exhaustion, irritability, frequent
colds, anemia and other unpredictable disorders. Such dieting is a
perilous experience for women in their menopause. It is a far more
perilous experience for developing girls and young women of child-
bearing age. By upsetting their metabolism, they set the stage for dif-
ficult pregnancies and delicate infants.

Though it is medically possible to help the diet-starved woman, it
is not simple. Their appetites may have failed, making a normal food
intake a hardship. They may have diminished the enzyme content of
their digestive juices making food assimilation difficult. Consequent-
ly, they may require bed rest and a gradual program of feeding to
build up their strength and their ability to exercise normally. I per-
sonally advocate a 3000 calorie diet with one part proteins, one part
fat of which 10 percent is unsaturated fatty acids and one part car-
bohydrates.

In my experience, there is no more important time to insure that a
diet is optimal than during pregnancy. The normal development of a
fetus depends on the expectant mother’s nutrition. Give her a diet of
adequate nutrients, make sure that she is physically active without
overtiring and that she is emotionally serene. She will soon feel the
vigorous kicking of her baby in uteroas her term nears its end.

I know for certain that breast milk from a healthy mother is the
optimal diet for infants. If it is necessary to remove a baby from the
breast before a normal span of nursing, or if nursing for some reason
is not possible, I would place the infant on Raw Certified Milk where
it is available. 

I would place the infant on raw liver and brain tissue
after instructing the mother how to recognize healthy liver. I would
not add muscle meat until the fifth or sixth month. Finally, I would
let the baby chew on a chicken bone when he can grasp it to toughen
his gums and I would encourage his shoulder girdle development
through programmed exercise. By the end of the first year, the child
will be ready to eat some of the normal family fare and will be able to
metabolize at least the recommended 1000 calories a day, and by the
second year, 2000 calories a day.

The dietary goal we seek to fulfill is obviously different from that
obtained by powdered or canned milk formulas with their canned
fruit, vegetable and meat supplements. We are working to develop
hard muscles and tight ligaments. We are working for hearty ap-
petites so that children can properly metabolize food and maintain
an optimal development with strong resistance to disease.

We know for sure that if we are to be a nation of healthy human
beings, self-confident in our abilities to meet life’s challenges, we
must start searching our souls for ways to insure that unborn genera-
tions of Americans can still obtain and metabolize an optimal diet.

