
Chapter Three

THE RAW MILK VERSUS COOKED MILK
FEEDING EXPERIMENT
“The Effect of Heat Processed Foods and Metabolized Vitamin D Milk on
the Dentofacial Structures of Experimental Animals,”’ ‘‘Clinical and Ex-
perimental Evidence of Growth Factors in Raw Milk,’’ ‘‘The Reciprocal
Relationship of Soil, Plant and Animal,”’ ‘‘Clinical Evidences of the Value
of Raw Milk”’

This feeding experiment involves four groups of cats. One group
receives a diet of 7/3 raw milk, 1 raw meat and cod liver oil. The
other groups receive a diet of either 2% pasteurized milk, 7%
evaporated milk, or 2/2 sweetened condensed milk plus 1/3 raw meat
and cod liver oil.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

The results of this experiment correspond to those of the raw meat
versus cooked meat experiment. Animals on raw milk and raw meat
reproduce homogeneous litters and the usual causes of death are old
age and injuries suffered in fighting. They are generally healthy
animals with normal anatomic measurements and good resistance to
disease. Their fur is of good quality with a notable sheen, and they
show no signs of allergy.

The cats fed pasteurized milk as the principal item of their diet
show skeletal changes, lessened reproductive efficiency and their kit-
tens present progressive constitutional and respiratory problems as is
evident in the first, second and third generation deficient cats eating
cooked meat.

Cats fed evaporated milk show even more damage than their
pasteurized counterparts while the most marked deficiencies occur
among those fed sweetened condensed milk. 
The cats on sweetened
condensed milk develop much heavier fat deposits and exhibit severe
skeletal deformities. They show extreme irritability and pace back
and forth in their pens nervously.

Table I reveals the effects of condensed milk, evaporated milk,
pasteurized milk and metabolized vitamin D milk on the life span of
specific experimental animals.




VARIATION — METABOLIZED VITAMIN D MILK

In this experiment cats receive Vitamin D Milk (from cattle fed ir-
radiated yeast) and raw meat. The male cats show osseous distur-
bances very like those on pasteurized milk while the females appear
unaffected. An interesting circumstance occurred in the males fed
this milk. Young males did not live beyond the second month and
adult males died within ten months. There is a notable tendency for
the calcium phosphorus ratio to become unbalanced approaching
2,5 to 1 as compared to a normal of 2 to 1. This tendency is ac-
companied by bone changes including the development of rickets in
some of the young animals. See Table II.

It is worth noting that natural cod liver oil, which is rich in vitamin
D, does not appear to adversely affect the development of either the
male or female cats while the Metabolized Vitamin D Milk from cat-
tle fed irradiated yeast is damaging to the males.

VARIATION — RAW MILK FROM COWS FED DRY FEED
AND FROM COWS FED FRESH FEED

In the course of producing and marketing adrenal cortical ex-
tracts, we began noting that the adrenal glands being used differed
greatly in their potency.* Seeking an explanation for this, we
discovered that the glands of the highest potency came from cows
and steers killed in Denver and those of the lowest potency came
from cows and steers slaughtered in the Los Angeles area. Tracing
this back, we learned that Denver animals were pastured on young,
rapid growing range grasses while the Los Angeles animals were fed
mostly dry feed consisting of molasses, cotton seed meal, beet pulp,
orange pulp, grape pulp and other industrial by-products, field-dried
alfalfa and grain. We further learned that the reproductive efficiency
of range cows is greater than dry feed lot cows and that a high rate of
mortality exists among dry feed lot calves.

From this information, it appears logical to assume that dietary
factors not only influence the potency of adrenal glands, but also in-
fluence the nutritive quality of cow’s milk. Just as the adrenal hor-
mones of cows fed on green pasture continually show a high concen-
tration and potency, so their milk appears to have a high concentra-
tion of the growth activators necessary for their calves’ healthy
development; and just as the hormones of dry feed lot cows are of
low concentration, so their milk appears deficient in the growth ac-
tivators necessary for nurturing and supporting their young.

In comparing the experimental effects on cats of a diet including
raw milk from fresh feed cows and those of a diet including raw milk
from dry feed cows, we find that the cats fed raw milk from dry feed
cows show similar deficiencies as those fed pasteurized milk.
Moreover, cats fed cooked meat, milk produced from dry feed cattle
and cod liver oil always deliver deficient kittens and have trouble
nursing, while cats fed a high grade raw milk from cows grazing on
green pasture or from cows fed freshly cut greens, cooked meat and
cod liver oil do better. The high grade raw milk appears to lessen the
deficiencies produced by the cooked meat. Conversely, cats fed dry
feed raw milk, raw meat and cod liver oil deliver normal kittens and
have adequate milk supplies. Here, the raw meat counters the defi-
ciency in the dry feed raw milk.
Chicken Industry

The same dry feed versus fresh feed findings hold true of the
chicken industry.

Farm chickens get out and scratch for worms and eat green grasses
and weeds. They lay eggs with hard shells and deep yellow yokes; and
when these eggs are fertilized, they hatch husky, healthy chicks. In
addition, farm chickens have supple skin, firm musculature and
almost twice as much calcium for a given weight of bone as mass pro-
duced, hatchery chickens.

In contrast, hatchery chickens are housed in wire pens and fed
various grains and other dry feeds. They lay eggs with thin shells and
pale yokes; and when their eggs are fertilized, a large percentage fail
to germinate. The hatchery chicken has thick skin, lax musculature,
pale fat, soft flesh and much smaller bones than the farm chicken.

In comparing the diets of farm and hatchery chickens and of range
and dry feed lot cattle, we find that they all contain adequate
amounts of fat, protein, carbohydrate and minerals. The difference
lies in the presence or absence of fresh factors. It is the fresh, raw
factors in feed that appear to hold the balance between a healthy
animal capable of reproducing healthy offspring and one that is
unhealthy and has poor reproductive efficiency. Logically, the nutri-
tional value of animal products such as milk and eggs depends on the
nutritional value of the producing animals’ diet. (See work of Oscar
Erf, Chap. 10.)

VARIATION — GUINEA PIGS FED DRY FEED
AND FRESH FEED

In this experiment, a group of guinea pigs is initially fed a diet of
rolled and cracked grain with supplements of cod liver oil and field-
dried alfalfa. Shortly, they show loss of hair, paralysis and high litter
mortality. Diarrhea, pneumonia and other deficiency symptoms in-
crease. When fresh cut green feed (grass cut after sundown, sacked
and delivered before sunrise) is introduced into their diet, the guinea
pigs show remarkable improvement. Infant mortality decreases and
the animals become huskier. No new cases of paralysis develop and
the alopecia lessens, though it does not disappear entirely.
