
Chapter Four
THE EFFECT OF RAW AND COOKED FOOD ON
THE DENTOFACIAL DEVELOPMENT OF CATS

“The Effect of Heat Processed Foods and Metabolized Vitamin D Milk on
the Dentofacial Structures of Experimental Animals,’’ ‘‘The Influence of
Heat Labile Factors on Nutrition in Oral Development and Health,’”’
“Nutritional Aspects of the Orthodontic Problem’’
Normal Cats

The cats receiving a raw meat, raw milk diet maintain a regular
broad face with prominent malar and orbital arches, adequate nasal
cavities, broad dental arches and regular dentition from generation
to generation. The configuration of the female skull remains distinct
from that of the male, and each maintains its normal facial outlines.
The mucous membranes are firm and of good, pink color showing
no evidence of infection or degenerative change. The teeth erupt
without difficulty and remain basically free of decay. See Figures 41
and 42

Deficient Cats

First Generation: Adult cats placed on a cooked meat or pasteuriz-
ed milk diet begin to show unhealthy conditions in their mouths
within three to six months. A pregnant cat shows the changes more
rapidly. These cats first present gingivitis followed by incrustation of
salivary calculi which continues to increase whether the cat is main-
tained on a deficient diet or returned to an optimum diet. As salivary
deposits increase, their gums become spongy. This leads to infections
and abscesses which sometimes break through the lining of the cheek
and drain outside. In three to five years, all the incisors and most of
the molars are missing. The ‘‘fangs’’ or canine teeth prove the most
resistent to abscesses and loss. Interestingly, no caries are noted in
this first deficient generation of cats. See Figure 43.

Second Generation: In the second generation of cooked food fed
cats, the newborn deficient kittens show irregular development of the
contours of the skull cap and a narrowing of the malar and orbital
arches. The latter become incomplete as deficiency progresses. Most
of the cats show longer and narrower faces with a retraction in the
middle third due to diminished development of the zygomatic arch
and diminished closure of the frontal sinuses. 


Failure in the lateral
movement of the face causes material narrowing of the mandible and
maxillary portions so that there is insufficient room for a complete
set of teeth to descend into place; and recessive or protruding man-
dibles are common causing underbites and overbites. See Figures 46,
47 and 48.


There is frequent delay in the loss of the deciduous teeth, and
therefore, permanent teeth do not erupt at a regular time as they do
in the raw food fed cats. Their eruption is often accompanied by
bleeding gums, by runny noses, by fevers and by prostration as op-
posed to normal cats that have teeth without problems. The primary
teeth are usually smaller and more irregular in size and in shape than
those of normal kittens. This is particularly true of the central in-
cisors, but also true of the canines, premolars and molars.

Where the canine teeth are quite resistent to deficiency in the first
generation, active root absorption occurs in the second generation
with softening of the base of the apices and loosening of the teeth.
Frequently the canines fall out before the molars. Absence of teeth,
especially the incisors, is quite common. As the jaw does not expand
or widen to make room for the permanent teeth, these teeth show
considerable crowding, twisting and impaction. See Figure 49.

The permanent teeth show greater irregularity in their size and
alignment than the deciduous teeth. Marked retraction of the mandi-
ble with failure in calcification causes poor bony support for the
teeth. As in the first generation of deficiency, gums are spongy and
abscesses develop. An interesting finding is that root resorption oc-
curs more commonly among cats fed a diet of heat-processed milk
than among those fed cooked meat.

Third Generation: The degenerative changes in the skull and
mouth grow more pronounced in the third generation of cooked
food fed cats. The frontal sinuses and zygomatic arch show little
development which allows for further retraction of the middle third
of the face. The skull of the second generation deficient adult is
smaller than that of the first deficient generation of the same age.
The skull of the third generation is materially smaller than that of the
second generation. However, there are some variations. Some kittens
have larger than normal brain cases with smaller than normal faces,
and these animals have a relatively poor forward projection of the
face as a whole. At times there is a marked tendency for the con-
figuration of the skull in both males and females to approach the
shape of the normal animal of the opposite sex.

In these third generation deficient cats, the bones are very fine
with scarcely enough structure to hold the skull together. The teeth
are smaller and much more irregular in size, shape and alignment,
and when the permanent teeth erupt, the cats are frequently prost-
rate. In some of these deficient kittens, the failure of the anterior
movement of the jaw is so great that the posterior molars, instead of
being embedded in the corpus of the mandible, remain in the ramus;
and the crown of the teeth, instead of being parallel to the floor of
the mouth, is perpendicular to it—a description of impacted wisdom
teeth.

Kittens in which deficiency is established by an inadequate diet
show stigmata throughout their lives. If deficient kittens are allowed
to live in the open and to feed upon rats, mice, birds, gophers and
other food natural to the cat, they will show a certain degree of cor-
rection in their deficiencies.

Two litter mates offer a good comparative example of the im-
provement possible by a natural diet. The mother of these two kit-
tens is a deficient animal eating cooked food.


 One of the litter mates
is kept in a pen on a similar deficient diet until approximately ten
months of age; the other, at five weeks of age, is forced to forage in
the wilds. The penned kitten shows marked dental deformity; the
foraging kitten shows the effects of its deficient history, but reveals
major correction in the alignment of its teeth and in its general
physiological stability. See Figure 410.

The improvement in the foraging kitten is probably caused by its
better diet, but also by the exercise it received eating its hunted prey
with all the ripping, tearing and chewing involved to work its jaw and
facial muscles. Even though the occlusion of its teeth is good, the
teeth are not of normal size.

If proper nutrition and exercise are absent when facial structures
are developing, dentition always suffers. The kitten kept on a defi-
cient diet for 10 months has an inadequate jaw with crowded, ir-
regular and poorly aligned teeth.

The deficient stigmata persist in the two litter mates and both die
at 14 months as a result of pregnancy.

Regenerating Cats

In the regenerating cats, skull development is still deficient in the
second generation with a universal malalignment of teeth. The third
generation shows marked improvement and in the fourth generation,
an occasional cat shows normal skull and dental development.
