
Chapter Fifteen
THE IMPORTANCE OF FATS IN NUTRITION
“Essentiality of Fats in Nutrition,” ‘‘In Defense of Fat,’ ‘‘The
Therapeutic Value of a Thermolabile Factor Found in Fats, Particularly the
Lecithins, In Dermatoses,’’ ‘‘A Common Form of Fat Dyscrasia: Dry
Skin”

Fats are present in every living cell and are essential to its life. The
human body varies in fat content, but as an average figure, a 150
pound man is estimated to be composed of:

Body Weight 70 Kg 100%
Fat 1Kg 10%
Protein 6,4Kg 9%
Carbohydrate 5,6Kg 8%
Mineral 2,0Kg 3%
Water 50,0Kg 70%

Intracellular fat is an important constituent in tissues such as mus-
cle, brain, pancreas and skin. Nerves are surrounded by a myelin
sheath largely composed of fats; and the leukocytes, the life-
protecting scavengers of our body, are also largely composed of fats.

The fat pads of the infant protect him from breaking his bones or
impairing other parts of the body by acting as a cushion when he
falls. Fat serves as a cushion and a support for the viscera. The
pressure fat pads of the hands, especially over the metacarpal heads,
are of the utmost importance to comfort while working. The pain
caused by the loss of these pads can make work with tools difficult to
impossible to perform. Similarly, the loss of the pads in the feet,

especially those over the metatarsal heads and over the heels, may
almost preclude walking.

Pressure pads are slow to replace once lost. Many never return.
This is true of the ischial pads of the older person. Aging plays an im-
portant part in the loss of fat pads, either by design or altered
metabolism. 


This makes the elderly more susceptible to mechanical
injuries to joints, bones and blood vessels. Furthermore, a person
may be obese and yet have poor fat and thus poor pressure pads,
while a muscular, skinny person may have excellent pressure fat pads
regardless of age.

Subcutaneous fat aids an individual in resisting excessive en-
vironmental temperature changes. Fat forms a thermal barrier to
prevent the body from losing heat when exposed to cold; and in case
of excessive heat, a well distributed subcutaneous adipose tissue may
save a life or protect a vital organ.

The surface of the skin is protected by a very fine fatty secretion
containing the unsaturated fatty acid fraction of the sebaceous secre-
tion and other lipoid materials such as hormones and proteins. The
ability of the unsaturated fatty acids to polymerize and to form flexi-
ble plastic surfaces provides the protective covering for the skin. The
basic reaction involved is no different than that involved when the
oxygen in the air polymerizes linseed oil to make a fine plastic sur-
face for furniture.

Adequate fat intake not only provides the plastic surface covering
for the skin, it provides the skin with bacteriacidal properties that
prevent invasion by the myriad of surrounding pathological
organisms. Likewise, the plastic layer prevents dirt and grime from
penetrating the layers of the skin. Consequently, not only does insuf-
ficient intake of unsaturated fats produce a rough, unattractive skin,
but it can cause the skin to develop painful cracks and abrasions.
Saturated and Unsaturated Fats

The primary source of man’s fats is vegetable; the secondary
source is animal. Fats, like proteins and carbohydrates, are of many
types, but are primarily triglycerides which are made up of fatty
acids and phospholipids. The fatty acids may be either saturated or
unsaturated, and the unsaturated fatty acids may be of one or more
double bonds. The double bonded fatty acids with 2 to 5 active
radicals show the greater biological activity. The phospholipids, of
which lecithin and cephalin are important members, are effective
wetting agents, and one of their essential uses in the body is to mix
water in oil and oil in water.

Essential fatty acids in foods can be harmful if allowed to become
rancid. Their spontaneous change into oderiferous aldehydes,
ketones and esters spoils food. 

The problem of rancidity is one of
preeminent concern to the food industry. However, in the processing
and stabilizing of vegetable oils and cereal grains to avoid this pro-
blem, many of our finest sources of unsaturated fats have been
rendered nutritively uselss except for the production of heat.

The prevailing fear of coronary disease causes people to avoid
eating the fat of meats though it is a valuable source of unsaturated
fat. The butcher frequently cuts away a large share of the fat on a
roast and on other cuts of meat. Those who do consume meat fats
are apt to want them well cooked and crispy. When foods are cooked
at high temperatures, many of the unsaturated fatty acids are oxidiz-
ed at their double bonds creating a different chemical of ques-
tionable metabolic value. It is known that when fats are heated to
high temperature, the breakdown of glycerin produces acroline, a
known poison. Lecithin, like other lipoid substances, is subject to
breakdown at normal cooking temperatures. Milk fats are also
altered during heat-processing as in pasteurized cream and butter.

Fat is the energy fuel of the body. The potential rate of heat pro-
duction is proportional to the degree of saturation of the fat. Though
some of the fats we consume are immediately brought into new
chemical relationships, much of it is stored in fatty deposits. The
nature of this fat is dependent, in part, on the ingested fat. It is sim-
ple to change the character of bodily fat from soft to hard by increas-
ing the intake of unsaturated fats.

In our experience, dry skin provides an index of disturbed fat
metabolism. Most patients attribute their dry skin disorders to one of
the following causes: hard water, improperly neutralized soaps,
detergents, various household chemicals, exposure to the sun or
wind, dry weather, dust and incompatible or excessive cosmetics.
Few suspect deficiencies in their fat intake. Recognizing that fatty
acids have largely disappeared from our modern dietary, we have
worked out a high protein, high fat, low carbohydrate diet for
general rehabilitation. The diet prescribed includes liver and brain,
cod liver oil, soy bean lecithin and edible linseed oil. In our ex-
perience, the conscientious patient usually shows skin improvements
in one week and may recover completely within two months.

