
Chapter Twelve

THE EFFECT OF DISTURBED NUTRITION

ON BONES DEVELOPING UNDER STRESS
“Studies of Fragmentation of the Tarsal and Metatarsal Bones Resulting
from Recurrent Metabolic Insults,’ ‘The Effect of Disturbed Nutrition on
Dentofacial Structures,’’ ‘Fragmentation and Scarring of the Tarsal and
Metatarsal Bones,”’ ‘‘Nutritional Aspects of the Orthodontic Problem,’’
“The Effect of Diet on the Nutrition of the Dental Patient’”’
Prenatal Disturbances

Though all organs of the body are integrated in the developmental
process, they form in utero according to a staggered time schedule.
Consider the dentofacial structures alone. The mandibular arch in
the fetus begins to develop about the twenty-eighth day while the
dental ridge begins to develop between the fortieth and forty-fifth
day. The germs of the deciduous teeth form about the sixty-fifth day
while the first permanent molar bud is formed by the fourth month.
Calcification of the enamel organ begins during the fifth month. A
series of X-ray studies reveal that metabolic disturbances of the
mother during pregnancy can affect the adequacy of the oral struc-
tures of the infant.

In a group of 15 children with very small deciduous teeth and nar-
row arches, histories of serious metabolic disturbance and accompa-
nying dietary insufficiencies occur in the first three months of
pregnancy. For example, serious nutritional disturbances during the
seventh week of pregnancy correlate with the receding mandible and
developmental failure of the maxillary portion of the face (Figure
122) and in the protruding mandible (Figure 121).

The influence of the dietary on the anterior portion of the face is
dramatic. During the pregnancy of the older child, the mother suf-
fers extreme emotional tension with accompanying malnutrition.
This child shows a narrow and poorly developed face. 


She has very
small primary dentition and the inferior development of her mandible
and mixilla is reflected in the paranasal sinuses and structures
beneath the base of her brain.

During the pregnancy of the younger child, the mother enjoys
relatively good physical and emotional health and eats an optimum
diet. In addition, this child is given a superior nutritional program to
that of her sister at the same age and never suffers the recurrent
metabolic upsets of her sister. It is evident that this girl has developed
a regular mandible and adequate room in the anterior portion of the
mouth for all of her teeth, and that her mandible is larger than that
of her sister who is two years older. Likewise, its length is greater and
the thickness of the rami is heavier. Her coronoid processes show
superior muscular development. The younger child shows breadth of
oral structures and symmetry of face in contrast to her sister whose
nares are pinched and whose nasal passageways are so small that her
tonsils and adenoids are a problem.



Postnatal Disturbances

After an infant is born, dietary deficiencies leave their mark on the
bones developing under the stresses of chewing and walking. Routine
X-rays are taken of the lateral and anterioposterior views of the
skull, of the hands and of the feet. Particular attention is given to the
bones of the feet of children between the ages of three months and
six years as they learn to walk. (Figures 125, 126 and 127).

The first evidence of fragmentation of the bones is in the internal
structures of the talus, cuboid or calcaneium and appears as quickly
as the third month (Figure 125).



Obvious fragmentation does not begin, 
as a rule, until the child starts to use his feet in walking. By the
second year, the cuboid, navicular and three cuneiform bones may
be severely involved. Fragmentation of the bases of the metatarsals
two, three, four and five and the proximal epiphysis of the metatar-
sal of the first digit may be noted (Figure 126). In many children
there is a disturbance in the proximal epiphysis of the first phalanx.
As the epiphyseal heads of the metatarsal bones develop, they may
not appear in a regular order, but frequently as semi-heads or
fragmented heads, or they may appear at a much later time than is
normally expected. This fragmentation reaches its maximum severity
between the third and fourth years.

In X-rays of children taken at six month intervals, we see the pro-
cess of healing begin at the bases of the metatarsals between the
fourth and fifth years (Figure 127). At the same time, the cuneiform
bones and the navicular bone are beginning to become smooth. The
third cuneiform usually shows signs of healing first. By the time the
child is six years old the epiphyseal heads are largely healed, while the
navicular bone and the first cuneiform may still show signs of some
unhealed fragmentation. Occasionally, active fragmentation is pre-
sent up to and including the seventh year. The scars formed during
the healing process are formed by a thickening of internal condensa-
tion of the trabeculae in the internal structure of the bone.

Between the tenth and eleventh years, when the epiphysis of the
base of the fifth metatarsal appears, new evidence of fragmentation
may occur.

During the period of marked fragmentation of the bones of the
feet, a child may show little or no outward evidence of extensive
bone damage. He may limp for a brief period, or his foot may
become flat. He rarely complains of pain. Yet, it is entirely possible
that the wide-spread prevalence of tarsal and metatarsal failure in the
deficient child may account for the crippling foot disturbances of
later life and may be the forerunner of arthritis.

In Figure 128, a boy patient experiences profound difficulty in
becoming established on an agreeable nutritional program. His
mother suffers from severe anemia during her pregnancy and is
unable to nurse him. By the age of three months, this boy develops
chronic bronchitis and asthma which is paralleled by visible distur-
bances in the osseous development. The bones of his feet are par-
ticularly affected. Healing of the basal epiphysis is not complete at
three years ten months (Figure 129) and requires another year to ap-
pear normal (Figure 1210).


The quality of the diet, prenatal and postnatal, affects the osseous
structures. Though the foot is the easiest of the structures of the
lower extremities to study, the ankle, the knee and the hip may show
disturbances in growth equally as well. The carpals and the metacar-
pals of the hand are not under as severe stress at the same
developmental time as the corresponding bones of the foot. The
child does not begin to use his hand for heavy work until after the
sixth year. By this time, the formation of the carpal bones is well
along, and the epiphyseal heads and the bases of the metacarpals are
thoroughly developed. Therefore, no definite correlation can be
drawn between the hand and foot with the possible exception that the
carpal bones may show a suggestive concomitant fragmentation of
the internal trabeculation. Figures 1211 and 1212 show the foot and
hand for comparison.

Correlations can be made between the fragmentation found in the
foot and malformation of the dentofacial structures (Figures 1213
and 1214).

The time between three months and six years corresponds to the
erupting and early shedding of deciduous teeth, to the expanding of
the dental arches to make room for permanent dentition and to the
budding of the permanent teeth, except for the third molars. It also
corresponds to the formation of the metatarsal bones and of the
epiphyses and to the completion and articulation of the metatarsal
bones with the cuboid and cuneiform bones and with each other.
Whenever deficiency in the osseous structure and coarse trabecula-
tion of the jawbone can be seen, severe metatarsal fragmentation in
the foot can also be seen.

The scars which are laid down in the bones during periods of
fragmentation appear to be permanent. Adult patients, who have
dentofacial failures, show scars in the bones of their feet similar to
those found in children. Though it appears impossible to remove the
scars themselves and impossible to change the developmental pat-
terns of bones, it is possible to improve organ efficiency and to alter
structural development. As mentioned, it is possible for an adult to
rebuild calcium in his bones by consuming adequate quantities of
growth promoting substances found in fresh and raw foods. The new
bone laid down in regeneration is not the original bone repaired, but
is a scar bone (Figure 1215).

X-rays and photographs (Figures 1216, 1217, 1218 and 1219)
show the recovery of a five year old girl with a disfiguring man-
dibular protrusion. Placed on a diet rich in growth and developmen-
tal activators, and encouraged to use her facial structures by chewing
tough objects and by making faces, the girl shows remarkable im-
provement by the age of ten. Though no orthodontic treatment is ap-
plied, her mandibular protrusion is largely corrected by the develop-
ment of the middle third of her face. This child is representative of a
group of children who experience improvement in facial develop-
ment solely because of dietary improvement (Figure 1220 and 1221).


Improvement of the facial configuration of deficient children can
be either progressive or retrogressive. We have had the opportunity
of noting broadening and development of the middle face by apply-
ing the principles learned from our research on cats. We have had the
sad experience of seeing children, who materially improve during a
two to three year period, show a definite retrogression because they
suddenly decide that the details of their dietary program are too
irksome for them to continue. 

It is logical to assume that children
who have fundamental structural weaknesses will lose what they gain
more easily when they revert to a poor diet.
Nutritional Principles

In applying the principles learned from our experimental work
with cats to human beings, we find that (1) all people are influenced
by preceding generations and (2) people can be healthy only if the
stock from which they come is healthy and the food which they eat is
adequate.

Since the individual is a product of heredity, both germ-plasm and
chemical, the way he develops after birth depends on the nutrition of
his inheritance as well as on his own nutrition. For this reason, nutri-
tion becomes one of the most important elements in preventive
medicine. Good food is important to the infant, the adolescent, the
adult and especially to the expectant mother. At any age, injury can
be done by an inadequate diet. 




Inadequacy in infancy and childhood
alters development; in later life, it affects the efficiency of organic
function, reproductivity and general physiologic activity.

Scientists first thought they had established that good nutrition
depends upon the adequate intake of proteins, carbohydrates, fats
and minerals only to realize later that hormones, enzymes and
vitamins are just as essential to the building and maintenance of the
human body. They are just beginning to realize that these vital
growth substances are destroyed by modern methods of milling,
heating and processing foods; and moreover, that modern methods
of agriculture and animal husbandry are depleting the soil and
depleting the quality of plant and animal products which furnish
these substances to our diet.*

We cannot go back and change the ancestors of our children, but
we can prescribe a diet which is adequate not only from the stand-
point of proteins, fats, carbohydrates and minerals, but from the
standpoint of hormones, enzymes and vitamins.

