 INTRODUCTION  As an author, researcher and observer in the raw food diet for therapy and maintenance for the past fifteen years, I am overwhelmed to discover Dr. Howell's book through the National Enzyme Co. I have been searching for and experimenting with exogenous (outside) digestive enzymes for many years in an attempt to allow folks to supplement their cooked food transition (or maintenance) diet. The best book on exogenous enzymes, which I discovered was the work of Dr. Howell "The Status of Food Enzymes in Digestion and Metabolism". He found plant enzymes in capsules best for predigestion. I was amazed that this book was written in 1939 at a time when most doctors knew nothing about vitamins and minerals and very few had heard the word "enzyme".  A classic is a work that is timeless. Although forty years have passed since it was written, today the book is more relevant than it ever was. Its truths need to be applied by all students of health and nutrition. I feel that it is one of the most important books to be published in the field of scientific nutrition.  Dr. Howell goes beyond everyone else and creates a scientific model for the treatment of all disease and the maintenance of perfect health that supercedes all other attempts at nutritional therapy. His approach is grounded in tradition (Genesis 1:29), the patterns of natural nutrition in animals, and sound cultural ecological dietary practices. Further, he is presenting one of the most heated, controversial and exciting debates in the history of dietary consideration -- raw foods versus cooked. His story is highly readable, at times entertaining, giving full scope through coverage of all possible implications, alternatives, and counterarguments. No region of importance is left uncovered. It can be read easily by the lay person, and inspire such a person to make dietary alterations, as well as give badly needed information to the highly trained scientist for application in expanding the science of nutrition such that diet will become the main tool for healing most of the existent physical and mental disorders. I believe that if we apply the enzyme rich raw food diet in therapy, and as a goal to be realized in the gradual dietary transition where each year one consumes larger quantities of raw food, then we will eliminate disease and increase each generation's longevity, and possibly even reach the spectacular ages of Methusalah and other Biblical patriarchs.  If pioneers of science were still being burned as in the past for proposing new interpretations which later become gospel truths, I would not give much for the life of Dr. Howell. "A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents by making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die and a new generation is familiar with it." Since Dr. Howell's book is already two generations old, we are finding greater receptivity among the scientific and lay communities as the opponents die off from their faulty dietary habits. A deep change in science will come about only when we have conscious, responsible scientists who see nature as a partner and bring wisdom to the layman so that they too apply nature's law to heal self and the planet  Enzymes effect our existence. They have been applied in every phase of healing from arthritis, diabetes, heart disorders and cancer, as well as in agriculture, dairy and wine fermentation, and the biological transmutation of one element into another. Without enzymes, we develop problems. 