 INTRODUCTION  As an author, researcher and observer in the raw food diet for therapy and maintenance for the past fifteen years, I am overwhelmed to discover Dr. Howell's book through the National Enzyme Co. I have been searching for and experimenting with exogenous (outside) digestive enzymes for many years in an attempt to allow folks to supplement their cooked food transition (or maintenance) diet. The best book on exogenous enzymes, which I discovered was the work of Dr. Howell "The Status of Food Enzymes in Digestion and Metabolism". He found plant enzymes in capsules best for predigestion. I was amazed that this book was written in 1939 at a time when most doctors knew nothing about vitamins and minerals and very few had heard the word "enzyme".  A classic is a work that is timeless. Although forty years have passed since it was written, today the book is more relevant than it ever was. Its truths need to be applied by all students of health and nutrition. I feel that it is one of the most important books to be published in the field of scientific nutrition.  Dr. Howell goes beyond everyone else and creates a scientific model for the treatment of all disease and the maintenance of perfect health that supercedes all other attempts at nutritional therapy. His approach is grounded in tradition (Genesis 1:29), the patterns of natural nutrition in animals, and sound cultural ecological dietary practices. Further, he is presenting one of the most heated, controversial and exciting debates in the history of dietary consideration -- raw foods versus cooked. His story is highly readable, at times entertaining, giving full scope through coverage of all possible implications, alternatives, and counterarguments. No region of importance is left uncovered. It can be read easily by the lay person, and inspire such a person to make dietary alterations, as well as give badly needed information to the highly trained scientist for application in expanding the science of nutrition such that diet will become the main tool for healing most of the existent physical and mental disorders. I believe that if we apply the enzyme rich raw food diet in therapy, and as a goal to be realized in the gradual dietary transition where each year one consumes larger quantities of raw food, then we will eliminate disease and increase each generation's longevity, and possibly even reach the spectacular ages of Methusalah and other Biblical patriarchs.  If pioneers of science were still being burned as in the past for proposing new interpretations which later become gospel truths, I would not give much for the life of Dr. Howell. "A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents by making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die and a new generation is familiar with it." Since Dr. Howell's book is already two generations old, we are finding greater receptivity among the scientific and lay communities as the opponents die off from their faulty dietary habits. A deep change in science will come about only when we have conscious, responsible scientists who see nature as a partner and bring wisdom to the layman so that they too apply nature's law to heal self and the planet  Enzymes effect our existence. They have been applied in every phase of healing from arthritis, diabetes, heart disorders and cancer, as well as in agriculture, dairy and wine fermentation, and the biological transmutation of one element into another. Without enzymes, we develop problems. The United States is ecologically in bad shape. The planet is polluted because the mind and spirit have lost contact with nature due to processed, devitalized foods which are clogging the bloodstream with poor nutrition thus attenuating the oxygen supply to the brain and all body parts. Bodies deficient in nutrients and overloaded with toxic waste are creating an epidemic in the United States where 65% of Americans are chronically ill and 20% of teenagers are suffering from premature aging.  What is so amazing is that although the universities and private research firms with budgets totalling in the billions of dollars have not managed to achieve a major breakthrough in the healing of the epidemic chronic disease, yet, nevertheless, a single man, forty years ago, could provide an answer to all human ailments as well as to aging. Dr. Howell comes to such a basic, yet controversial conclusion that many, if not all degenerative diseases that Americans suffer from, are doctored for and die from are chiefly caused by eating cooked foods and produce deficient in enzymes. His research is the first significant scientific attempt to show the importance of raw foods in human nutrition. His work basically shows that science made a great mistake when it endorsed cooked food eating, a mistake which has led to the development of one of the sickest nations in the world.  Today many researchers are catching up with and extending the pioneer work of Dr. Howell. There is a significant turn of events in research, for example in the study of cancer, where few highly respected researchers are relating the disease to enzyme deficiency which could be prevented and possibly reversed through live food dietary management. Some of the researchers are Dr. Arthur Robinson, Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine; Dr. Chiu Nan Lai, University of Texas System Cancer Center; M. D. Anderson, Hospital and Tumor Institute; Dr. Max Gerson, author of "Cancer: 51 Cases"; Professor William Salter, Yale Medical School.  Already, during the first week of 1980, a cancer study by the National Cancer Institute approved the first clinical trial of laetrile and enzymes on humans in conjunction with a "special metabolic diet" (the terminology used to designate a diet of predominantly raw foods according to the explanation I received from the research project spokesman). Last year two health journals, "Let's Live" and "Bestways", which are among the journals with the largest circulation, strongly advocated a modified raw food diet.  The live food program that Dr. Ann Wigmore and myself developed at the Hippocrates Health Institute, Boston, has proven to be effective in the prevention and reversal of degenerative disease, as well as a tasty and efficient maintenance diet. It is the diet most rich in enzymes. It is inexpensive, can be totally organic, and grown even in a city apartment.  Leukemia is a classic area for the study of this raw foods diet. Genetically predisposed individuals will develop leukemia on a poor quality diet Raw food will help to alleviate the condition by eliminating the excess of leucocytes produced due to cooked food.  " 'Leucocytosis' is the name that medical pathology gives to an excessive augment of white blood corpuscles in the blood. Donders discovered the phenomenon in 1846 and Virchow classified 'digestive leucocytosis' as 'normal' since everyone seemed to suffer from it. This was upset by Dr. Paul Kautchakoff, M.D. who showed that the cooking of food was the cause of leucocytosis. The white blood corpuscles prevent infection and intoxication of the blood. Kautchakoff found that he could divide his findings on leucocytosis in four distinct groups according to reaction in the blood: 1) raw food produced no augment in white blood cells of the blood; 2) common cooked food caused leucocytosis; 3) pressure cooked food caused greater leucocytosis than non-pressure cooked food; 4) manufactured foods such as wine, vinegar, white sugar, ham, etc. are the most offensive. Kautchakoff was no vegetarian yet his findings show that flesh would have to be eaten raw to avoid leucocytosis which would be unpalatable to humans, but prepared meat (cooked, smoked, salted, etc.) brought on the most violent reaction equivalent to the leucocytosis count manifest in poisoning."  Why this pathological condition exists after eating cooked food can be best explained by the fact that the cooked food is totally devoid of enzymes. The pancreas needs those enzymes in conjunction with the digestive enzymes it has stored up in order to break down the food components into units small enough to enter the blood and lymph. The leucocytes are rich in enzymes and are being transported to the stomach area to aid in the digestive process. They also carry on similar functions in the time of colds and other germ related diseases; in such cases they digest the foreign particles or protein invading based germs.  The condition of leukemia manifests in genetically predisposed individuals on a cooked and processed food diet. The body has been sensitized to overact in production of white blood enzyme rich cells when the pancreas is malfunctioning and supplying very few digestive enzymes. Furthermore, the condition is associated with higher amounts of uric acid and a weakened kidney. The white blood cells are being utilized to compensate, very ineffectively, for the mentioned deficiencies, by trying to digest—eat up—the foreign protein and excess uric acid. The cooked foods, according to Kautchakoff trigger off increased production of leucocytes, and Howell shows that they are acting as digestants.  Many successful therapies have been reported based on natural diets. Most researchers are finding leukemia to be the easiest of all cancers to correct At Hippocrates Health Institute, I witnessed two cases of leukemia, one of ten years duration, heal on a raw food regimen in six weeks time. Also, Lancet and Polish Medical Journal report Dr. Kalikowski's studies where low protein diet was used, in conjunction with high alkaline solutions, to cure leukemia; "favorable effects in ten out of thirteen children with leukemia. . . . a strikingly fast disappearance of blast cells in bone marrow was noted compared to controls." One of the reasons given for lack of complete success was that they had not yet devised an optimal diet.  At the Survival Foundation research farm I witnessed several astonishing cases of reversal of disease this past summer: a young man who was to be on insulin, according to the "best" authorities, for the rest of his life, gradually reduced from eighty units to none in two weeks; a woman with uterine cancer and low energy was relieved of all symptoms in two months; another woman, using up to twenty pills daily to control pain for over ten years, stopped use of all drugs in one day without further recurrence of headaches now for three months; a middle-aged leukemia patient after fifteen years of chemotheraphy found a program that returned the white and red blood cell count to normal in six weeks. There are thousands of success stories like that. One point in common is reliance upon a high enzyme predigested live food diet consisting of sprouts, seed and vegetable ferments, and live juices from baby greens, fresh fruits and vegetables.  I have been working many years with such a diet for maintenance and therapy. The success of this program with degenerative diseases—including cancer and other "incurable" diseases—is overwhelming. I have not run into a single case where recovery was not possible provided the patient had not been destroyed irreversibly by surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation. Even in such cases encouraging results have been obtained.  Today many papers are being published by medical clinics and universities which have been influenced by our dietary studies. The work in the field of cancer with wheatgrass and raw food diet has been done by Dr. Arthur Robinson (Linus Pauling Institute) and Dr. Chiu Nan Lai (Anderson Hospital, Houston, Texas). In Annals of Internal Medicine, 1977, Dr. John Douglas, who used raw foods with high success in the treatment of diabetes, states, "My rationale is that since early man lived entirely on raw foods perhaps such a diet would be less stressful to the human system in general and less likely to produce diabetes than a cooked diet".  One of the most exciting recent developments in raw foods research is showing that raw inorganic produce are safer then cooked. Dr. William Newsome of Canada's Department of Health and Welfare Food Research Division, Bureau of Chemical Safety, found, for example, that cooked tomatoes contain ten to ninety times more ETU (fetus-deforming and cancer causing compound) than raw tomatoes from the same garden. His studies showed that ETU is the heat caused end product of widely used EBDC fungicides. He states, "Generally the amount of ETU in cooked vegetables was about 50 times more than in uncooked vegetables.".  In animal experiments a classical study by Dr. F. M. Pottinger was conducted for ten years involving nine-hundred cats who were fed cooked and raw food diets. Results were observed for four generations. The cats fed cooked food developed the spectrum of degenerative diseases found in our society. In each succeeding generation, the disease became more chronic. By the third generation, reproduction became impossible. However, cats fed raw food continued to produce from one generation to the next healthy litters of youthful, flexible and active offsprings.  Most civilized people eat cooked food. Dr. Howell carried out extensive work to minimize the damage due to such dietary indulgences. He was the first researcher to investigate the digestive enzyme supplementation for the cooked food eating vegetarian as well as mixed diet users. He noted that pancreatin enzyme supplementation was useless in the high acid of the stomach since it functions best in the high alkaline environment of the small intestine. The papain enzyme used in tenderizing meat needed high temperatures, beyond stomach range, so it was not fully potent as a supplement. Unripe papaya and pineapple work well on protein only. The best source of a mixture of digestive enzymes has been found in the different strains of the Aspergillus plants. They work on the full range of fats, proteins, carbohydrates and cellulose. Dr. Howell, in spite of doing the research and pioneer work on these most perfect enzymes, has maintained complete independence of any financial involvement with the manufacture and marketing of such products.  In my contacts in healing work, I have found that although many turned to raw foods for the alleviation of disease, the majority continued to maintain themselves on dead food, leading to eventual pain, stress and ailment. In an attempt to help them I saw that it was essential to have food thoroughly digested, the nutrients successfully distributed in cells, and fecal waste eliminated. This led to the supplement program of digestive enzymes, liquid chlorophyll and cayenne for circulation and a mild herbal for building up strength of internal organs so that effective elimination of waste and fecal matter could take place. As I searched for the perfect enzyme supplementation for those who still insist on using cooked food, and having experimented with most enzymes on the market, I found that the aspergillus plant in capsules are best. Two to five capsules with the meal on food (preferably shaken out of the capsule) is best.  A good example of the potency of this approach was my Grandmother—a bedridden case of heart disease, asthma, arthritis, and kidney disorder of eighty years of age. Within several weeks of the inauguration of the supplementation program, she was doing all the house chores for a family of four,—cooking, laundry, cleaning, as well as reading, praying, watching television and socializing. From bed to full activity: this high energy continued for over two years.  A human is nourished and maintained not by what he eats, but by what is digested. All food is, at least potentially, a poison, until converted into simple structures by enzymes. There are two types of life building chemistries. One is found in raw food and called exogenous; the other is produced within your own body and is referred to as endogenous enzymes. The more one gets exogenous enzymes from raw food, the less will have to be supplied by the pancreas and leucocytes, thus allowing endogenous enzymes to be utilized for the body maintenance, waste disposal, and extension of longevity. The enzymes found in raw food are released immediately after chewing to start breaking down the ingested food. Within thirty minutes after a meal, the acidity rises significantly and the ingested food enzymes become inactivated. Now the protein process takes over as it is acted upon by the hydrochloric acid and pepsin of the stomach.  There are more than 80,000 enzyme systems, each performing a specialized function from digestion of food to color of hair, to movement of the tongue or retina as you are speaking or reading this text. The food substances—protein, fats, carbohydrate, vitamin, mineral—are the raw material which is utilized by the enzyme systems to carry on all the life processes and create all body parts.  You can eat a diet that has no enzymes and still live for many years, even to ripe old age, through each generation you would produce inferior offspring, and eventually reproduction would be impossible. Would it not be better to let outside enzymes do some of the work and save your own enzymes for cellular work? It is possible that cellular enzyme exhaustion is the root cause of what ails us. Dr. Howell and other researchers show that cooked food with the fiber broken down passes through the digestive system more slowly than raw foods. Partially, it ferments, rots, putrifies, throwing back into the body, causing gas, heartburn and degenerative diseases.  Colon therapists and researchers in degenerative diseases have shown that much of the body weight can be just waste accumulated within the 60,000 miles of blood vessels, the lymphatic system, bone joint and intra-extra-cellular regions. The largest amount is found in the impactations within the colon structures: fecal waste can be up to fifty pounds accumulated over the decades from feasting on greasy food. Due to this presence of partially digested cooked food along the small intestine and colon, some of it passes into the bloodstrteam and is deposited as waste throughout the system. If it is calories, it can show up as obesity; if excess minerals we have arthritis; excess protein is built into cancer; fat leads to high cholesterol; sugar to diabetes.  The best alternatives to cooked and chemicalized foods is growing organic produce seasonally, purchasing additional food from natural method growers and starting a home indoor program of the high enzyme foods; soaked seeds, sprouts, baby greens, milk or ferment products from soaked seeds or nuts, raw foods, rejuvilac and raw juices.  Most people do not seem to have a large variance of vitamins and minerals over the years. However, the enzyme levels drop significantly in aging; as the body gets weaker and the enzymes get fewer, old age symptoms manifest. At the world famous Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago, researchers found that old people have only one-thirtieth as much enzymes in the saline as young folks. Also people with high enzyme diets have extensive longevity patterns. For example, people like Georgians, Equadorans, and Hunzas have diets rich in enzymes and have a high concentration of centurians (Natural Geographic, June 1973). They make extensive use of fermentation—soy, dairy, vegetables and fruits. Also, they utilize sprouting as well as soaking of seeds which increases the enzyme level up to twenty times and raw or undercooked food. They also fast seasonally during periods of food scarcity. Dr. Howell states that during fasting there is a halt in digestive enzyme production. The enzymes are used to digest the partially digested stored food of fatty tissue, scars, arthritis, tumor, hardening of the arteries, etc. Thus, the enforced fast is another health and longevity promoting benefit.  Dr. Howell's contribution to our understanding of enzymes and raw food research shows that not only will the physical man be healed, but also the spiritual being will manifest He provides the evidence that cooked food contributes to the pathological overenlargement of the pituitary gland, which regulates the other glands. In a study of accidental deaths where the victims aged over fifty, it was found that one hundred percent of them had a defective pituitary. The gonads, adrenals, isles of Langerhans and other ductless glands of most folks are exhausted from cooked food. These are the spiritual energy organs. Raw food can assist you to be intuitive, high in prana, and in communion with God.  Dr. Howell's classic work on enzymes precedes the discovery of biological transmutation by Louis Kervan who showed that enzymes are actively involved in the alchemy of converting one element into another. A diet which centers on cooked foods leads to enzyme exhaustion and the impossibility of transmutation. The existence of people in the past, as well as now who eat or drink not, and who carry on normal high energy lives, shows that the human system, when not having to eliminate waste can become a complete ecosystem with recycling and transmutation monitored such that the only input required is air and sunlight and a lifestyle free of all emotional stress, that is, a life of love and service.  The superiority of the raw food diet over cooked food can be tested in many new ways. Kinesiology, which utilizes strength change in the muscle and organ systems is one method. Have the individual stand with right arm (opposite for left handed) extended straight out, parallel to the ground, palm up. Test arm strength by pulling down on wrist. Next test the following procedure. Place in your left palm against the solar plexus separately a processed carbohydrate (sugar), cooked carbohydrate (bread), soaked wheat, sprouted sunflower, baby sunflower greens, sunflower yogurt, and finally sunflower cheese. You will be amazed at the strength generated by raw food, especially sprouted or fermented food, in comparison to the cooked versions. As this food stays in your body twelve to twenty-four hours, it will be likewise strengthening or weakening your body.  Chromatography is another method. This technique has been used in urine analysis up to 1944. In 1953, Dr. E. Pfeiffer used it to test for qualitative and biological values that give indications of enzyme activity. The chromatograph is a picture of color, rings and spike-like forms with a definite pattern that shows enzyme presence. Inorganic minerals, chemicals, or synthetic vitamins and cooked produce showed only colored rings but no definite pattern.  Most folks can demonstrate the enzyme action of ptyalin in the mouth by chewing an unsweetened slice of whole wheat bread. In no time it turns sweet in the mouth. Also, in high school, students use a simple test to demonstrate the presence of starch. By adding one drop of tincture of iodine to starch mixture, a blue color will result. If one teaspoon of starch mixture clears, then the iodine will cause no color change. The starch has been converted to maltose, a form of suqar.  Now on the market is available a thermography machine (AGA Company, 550 County Avenue, Secaucus, New Jersey 07094) which creates photos based on the heat generated by body cells, which depend on the free flow of nutrients and oxygen. The comparative photos that I have done show a clear facial image in the photo of a raw foodist, high enzyme eater. However, the photos of old people or young people on cooked food diet create photos that are totally devoid of detail, this indicating poor circulation and a badly starved body.  With this advancement in technology and the development of new methods of testing, the work of Dr. Howell stands uncontradicted. "The Status of Food Enzymes in Digestion and Metabolism" may be the most important book in scientific nutrition that has been written by a doctor and published in this century. Its range is beyond everyone elses and it makes the subject an exciting challenge. Dr. Howell shows that you can create your own health environment through dietary choice, raw foods in preference to cooked. Given the time, we will see that the man was a genius, creating forty years ago a nutritional theory that will be instrumental in healing degenerative disorders, extending longevity, and delineating some of the physiology of higher states of consciousness. I feel that 1981 will be the "Year of the Enzyme" and the 1980's will be the decade when raw foods will be considered the most important component in one's diet.  Victoras Kulvinskas, M.S.    Woodstock Valley, Connecticut November 6, 1980  INTRODUCTION  As an author, researcher and observer in the raw food diet for therapy and maintenance for the past fifteen years, I am overwhelmed to discover Dr. Howell's book through the National Enzyme Co. I have been searching for and experimenting with exogenous (outside) digestive enzymes for many years in an attempt to allow folks to supplement their cooked food transition (or maintenance) diet. The best book on exogenous enzymes, which I discovered was the work of Dr. Howell "The Status of Food Enzymes in Digestion and Metabolism". He found plant enzymes in capsules best for predigestion. I was amazed that this book was written in 1939 at a time when most doctors knew nothing about vitamins and minerals and very few had heard the word "enzyme".  A classic is a work that is timeless. Although forty years have passed since it was written, today the book is more relevant than it ever was. Its truths need to be applied by all students of health and nutrition. I feel that it is one of the most important books to be published in the field of scientific nutrition.  Dr. Howell goes beyond everyone else and creates a scientific model for the treatment of all disease and the maintenance of perfect health that supercedes all other attempts at nutritional therapy. His approach is grounded in tradition (Genesis 1:29), the patterns of natural nutrition in animals, and sound cultural ecological dietary practices. Further, he is presenting one of the most heated, controversial and exciting debates in the history of dietary consideration -- raw foods versus cooked. His story is highly readable, at times entertaining, giving full scope through coverage of all possible implications, alternatives, and counterarguments. No region of importance is left uncovered. It can be read easily by the lay person, and inspire such a person to make dietary alterations, as well as give badly needed information to the highly trained scientist for application in expanding the science of nutrition such that diet will become the main tool for healing most of the existent physical and mental disorders. I believe that if we apply the enzyme rich raw food diet in therapy, and as a goal to be realized in the gradual dietary transition where each year one consumes larger quantities of raw food, then we will eliminate disease and increase each generation's longevity, and possibly even reach the spectacular ages of Methusalah and other Biblical patriarchs.  If pioneers of science were still being burned as in the past for proposing new interpretations which later become gospel truths, I would not give much for the life of Dr. Howell. "A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents by making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die and a new generation is familiar with it." Since Dr. Howell's book is already two generations old, we are finding greater receptivity among the scientific and lay communities as the opponents die off from their faulty dietary habits. A deep change in science will come about only when we have conscious, responsible scientists who see nature as a partner and bring wisdom to the layman so that they too apply nature's law to heal self and the planet  Enzymes effect our existence. They have been applied in every phase of healing from arthritis, diabetes, heart disorders and cancer, as well as in agriculture, dairy and wine fermentation, and the biological transmutation of one element into another. Without enzymes, we develop problems. The United States is ecologically in bad shape. The planet is polluted because the mind and spirit have lost contact with nature due to processed, devitalized foods which are clogging the bloodstream with poor nutrition thus attenuating the oxygen supply to the brain and all body parts. Bodies deficient in nutrients and overloaded with toxic waste are creating an epidemic in the United States where 65% of Americans are chronically ill and 20% of teenagers are suffering from premature aging.  What is so amazing is that although the universities and private research firms with budgets totalling in the billions of dollars have not managed to achieve a major breakthrough in the healing of the epidemic chronic disease, yet, nevertheless, a single man, forty years ago, could provide an answer to all human ailments as well as to aging. Dr. Howell comes to such a basic, yet controversial conclusion that many, if not all degenerative diseases that Americans suffer from, are doctored for and die from are chiefly caused by eating cooked foods and produce deficient in enzymes. His research is the first significant scientific attempt to show the importance of raw foods in human nutrition. His work basically shows that science made a great mistake when it endorsed cooked food eating, a mistake which has led to the development of one of the sickest nations in the world.  Today many researchers are catching up with and extending the pioneer work of Dr. Howell. There is a significant turn of events in research, for example in the study of cancer, where few highly respected researchers are relating the disease to enzyme deficiency which could be prevented and possibly reversed through live food dietary management. Some of the researchers are Dr. Arthur Robinson, Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine; Dr. Chiu Nan Lai, University of Texas System Cancer Center; M. D. Anderson, Hospital and Tumor Institute; Dr. Max Gerson, author of "Cancer: 51 Cases"; Professor William Salter, Yale Medical School.  Already, during the first week of 1980, a cancer study by the National Cancer Institute approved the first clinical trial of laetrile and enzymes on humans in conjunction with a "special metabolic diet" (the terminology used to designate a diet of predominantly raw foods according to the explanation I received from the research project spokesman). Last year two health journals, "Let's Live" and "Bestways", which are among the journals with the largest circulation, strongly advocated a modified raw food diet.  The live food program that Dr. Ann Wigmore and myself developed at the Hippocrates Health Institute, Boston, has proven to be effective in the prevention and reversal of degenerative disease, as well as a tasty and efficient maintenance diet. It is the diet most rich in enzymes. It is inexpensive, can be totally organic, and grown even in a city apartment.  Leukemia is a classic area for the study of this raw foods diet. Genetically predisposed individuals will develop leukemia on a poor quality diet Raw food will help to alleviate the condition by eliminating the excess of leucocytes produced due to cooked food.  " 'Leucocytosis' is the name that medical pathology gives to an excessive augment of white blood corpuscles in the blood. Donders discovered the phenomenon in 1846 and Virchow classified 'digestive leucocytosis' as 'normal' since everyone seemed to suffer from it. This was upset by Dr. Paul Kautchakoff, M.D. who showed that the cooking of food was the cause of leucocytosis. The white blood corpuscles prevent infection and intoxication of the blood. Kautchakoff found that he could divide his findings on leucocytosis in four distinct groups according to reaction in the blood: 1) raw food produced no augment in white blood cells of the blood; 2) common cooked food caused leucocytosis; 3) pressure cooked food caused greater leucocytosis than non-pressure cooked food; 4) manufactured foods such as wine, vinegar, white sugar, ham, etc. are the most offensive. Kautchakoff was no vegetarian yet his findings show that flesh would have to be eaten raw to avoid leucocytosis which would be unpalatable to humans, but prepared meat (cooked, smoked, salted, etc.) brought on the most violent reaction equivalent to the leucocytosis count manifest in poisoning."  Why this pathological condition exists after eating cooked food can be best explained by the fact that the cooked food is totally devoid of enzymes. The pancreas needs those enzymes in conjunction with the digestive enzymes it has stored up in order to break down the food components into units small enough to enter the blood and lymph. The leucocytes are rich in enzymes and are being transported to the stomach area to aid in the digestive process. They also carry on similar functions in the time of colds and other germ related diseases; in such cases they digest the foreign particles or protein invading based germs.  The condition of leukemia manifests in genetically predisposed individuals on a cooked and processed food diet. The body has been sensitized to overact in production of white blood enzyme rich cells when the pancreas is malfunctioning and supplying very few digestive enzymes. Furthermore, the condition is associated with higher amounts of uric acid and a weakened kidney. The white blood cells are being utilized to compensate, very ineffectively, for the mentioned deficiencies, by trying to digest—eat up—the foreign protein and excess uric acid. The cooked foods, according to Kautchakoff trigger off increased production of leucocytes, and Howell shows that they are acting as digestants.  Many successful therapies have been reported based on natural diets. Most researchers are finding leukemia to be the easiest of all cancers to correct At Hippocrates Health Institute, I witnessed two cases of leukemia, one of ten years duration, heal on a raw food regimen in six weeks time. Also, Lancet and Polish Medical Journal report Dr. Kalikowski's studies where low protein diet was used, in conjunction with high alkaline solutions, to cure leukemia; "favorable effects in ten out of thirteen children with leukemia. . . . a strikingly fast disappearance of blast cells in bone marrow was noted compared to controls." One of the reasons given for lack of complete success was that they had not yet devised an optimal diet.  At the Survival Foundation research farm I witnessed several astonishing cases of reversal of disease this past summer: a young man who was to be on insulin, according to the "best" authorities, for the rest of his life, gradually reduced from eighty units to none in two weeks; a woman with uterine cancer and low energy was relieved of all symptoms in two months; another woman, using up to twenty pills daily to control pain for over ten years, stopped use of all drugs in one day without further recurrence of headaches now for three months; a middle-aged leukemia patient after fifteen years of chemotheraphy found a program that returned the white and red blood cell count to normal in six weeks. There are thousands of success stories like that. One point in common is reliance upon a high enzyme predigested live food diet consisting of sprouts, seed and vegetable ferments, and live juices from baby greens, fresh fruits and vegetables.  I have been working many years with such a diet for maintenance and therapy. The success of this program with degenerative diseases—including cancer and other "incurable" diseases—is overwhelming. I have not run into a single case where recovery was not possible provided the patient had not been destroyed irreversibly by surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation. Even in such cases encouraging results have been obtained.  Today many papers are being published by medical clinics and universities which have been influenced by our dietary studies. The work in the field of cancer with wheatgrass and raw food diet has been done by Dr. Arthur Robinson (Linus Pauling Institute) and Dr. Chiu Nan Lai (Anderson Hospital, Houston, Texas). In Annals of Internal Medicine, 1977, Dr. John Douglas, who used raw foods with high success in the treatment of diabetes, states, "My rationale is that since early man lived entirely on raw foods perhaps such a diet would be less stressful to the human system in general and less likely to produce diabetes than a cooked diet".  One of the most exciting recent developments in raw foods research is showing that raw inorganic produce are safer then cooked. Dr. William Newsome of Canada's Department of Health and Welfare Food Research Division, Bureau of Chemical Safety, found, for example, that cooked tomatoes contain ten to ninety times more ETU (fetus-deforming and cancer causing compound) than raw tomatoes from the same garden. His studies showed that ETU is the heat caused end product of widely used EBDC fungicides. He states, "Generally the amount of ETU in cooked vegetables was about 50 times more than in uncooked vegetables.".  In animal experiments a classical study by Dr. F. M. Pottinger was conducted for ten years involving nine-hundred cats who were fed cooked and raw food diets. Results were observed for four generations. The cats fed cooked food developed the spectrum of degenerative diseases found in our society. In each succeeding generation, the disease became more chronic. By the third generation, reproduction became impossible. However, cats fed raw food continued to produce from one generation to the next healthy litters of youthful, flexible and active offsprings.  Most civilized people eat cooked food. Dr. Howell carried out extensive work to minimize the damage due to such dietary indulgences. He was the first researcher to investigate the digestive enzyme supplementation for the cooked food eating vegetarian as well as mixed diet users. He noted that pancreatin enzyme supplementation was useless in the high acid of the stomach since it functions best in the high alkaline environment of the small intestine. The papain enzyme used in tenderizing meat needed high temperatures, beyond stomach range, so it was not fully potent as a supplement. Unripe papaya and pineapple work well on protein only. The best source of a mixture of digestive enzymes has been found in the different strains of the Aspergillus plants. They work on the full range of fats, proteins, carbohydrates and cellulose. Dr. Howell, in spite of doing the research and pioneer work on these most perfect enzymes, has maintained complete independence of any financial involvement with the manufacture and marketing of such products.  In my contacts in healing work, I have found that although many turned to raw foods for the alleviation of disease, the majority continued to maintain themselves on dead food, leading to eventual pain, stress and ailment. In an attempt to help them I saw that it was essential to have food thoroughly digested, the nutrients successfully distributed in cells, and fecal waste eliminated. This led to the supplement program of digestive enzymes, liquid chlorophyll and cayenne for circulation and a mild herbal for building up strength of internal organs so that effective elimination of waste and fecal matter could take place. As I searched for the perfect enzyme supplementation for those who still insist on using cooked food, and having experimented with most enzymes on the market, I found that the aspergillus plant in capsules are best. Two to five capsules with the meal on food (preferably shaken out of the capsule) is best.  A good example of the potency of this approach was my Grandmother—a bedridden case of heart disease, asthma, arthritis, and kidney disorder of eighty years of age. Within several weeks of the inauguration of the supplementation program, she was doing all the house chores for a family of four,—cooking, laundry, cleaning, as well as reading, praying, watching television and socializing. From bed to full activity: this high energy continued for over two years.  A human is nourished and maintained not by what he eats, but by what is digested. All food is, at least potentially, a poison, until converted into simple structures by enzymes. There are two types of life building chemistries. One is found in raw food and called exogenous; the other is produced within your own body and is referred to as endogenous enzymes. The more one gets exogenous enzymes from raw food, the less will have to be supplied by the pancreas and leucocytes, thus allowing endogenous enzymes to be utilized for the body maintenance, waste disposal, and extension of longevity. The enzymes found in raw food are released immediately after chewing to start breaking down the ingested food. Within thirty minutes after a meal, the acidity rises significantly and the ingested food enzymes become inactivated. Now the protein process takes over as it is acted upon by the hydrochloric acid and pepsin of the stomach.  There are more than 80,000 enzyme systems, each performing a specialized function from digestion of food to color of hair, to movement of the tongue or retina as you are speaking or reading this text. The food substances—protein, fats, carbohydrate, vitamin, mineral—are the raw material which is utilized by the enzyme systems to carry on all the life processes and create all body parts.  You can eat a diet that has no enzymes and still live for many years, even to ripe old age, through each generation you would produce inferior offspring, and eventually reproduction would be impossible. Would it not be better to let outside enzymes do some of the work and save your own enzymes for cellular work? It is possible that cellular enzyme exhaustion is the root cause of what ails us. Dr. Howell and other researchers show that cooked food with the fiber broken down passes through the digestive system more slowly than raw foods. Partially, it ferments, rots, putrifies, throwing back into the body, causing gas, heartburn and degenerative diseases.  Colon therapists and researchers in degenerative diseases have shown that much of the body weight can be just waste accumulated within the 60,000 miles of blood vessels, the lymphatic system, bone joint and intra-extra-cellular regions. The largest amount is found in the impactations within the colon structures: fecal waste can be up to fifty pounds accumulated over the decades from feasting on greasy food. Due to this presence of partially digested cooked food along the small intestine and colon, some of it passes into the bloodstrteam and is deposited as waste throughout the system. If it is calories, it can show up as obesity; if excess minerals we have arthritis; excess protein is built into cancer; fat leads to high cholesterol; sugar to diabetes.  The best alternatives to cooked and chemicalized foods is growing organic produce seasonally, purchasing additional food from natural method growers and starting a home indoor program of the high enzyme foods; soaked seeds, sprouts, baby greens, milk or ferment products from soaked seeds or nuts, raw foods, rejuvilac and raw juices.  Most people do not seem to have a large variance of vitamins and minerals over the years. However, the enzyme levels drop significantly in aging; as the body gets weaker and the enzymes get fewer, old age symptoms manifest. At the world famous Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago, researchers found that old people have only one-thirtieth as much enzymes in the saline as young folks. Also people with high enzyme diets have extensive longevity patterns. For example, people like Georgians, Equadorans, and Hunzas have diets rich in enzymes and have a high concentration of centurians (Natural Geographic, June 1973). They make extensive use of fermentation—soy, dairy, vegetables and fruits. Also, they utilize sprouting as well as soaking of seeds which increases the enzyme level up to twenty times and raw or undercooked food. They also fast seasonally during periods of food scarcity. Dr. Howell states that during fasting there is a halt in digestive enzyme production. The enzymes are used to digest the partially digested stored food of fatty tissue, scars, arthritis, tumor, hardening of the arteries, etc. Thus, the enforced fast is another health and longevity promoting benefit.  Dr. Howell's contribution to our understanding of enzymes and raw food research shows that not only will the physical man be healed, but also the spiritual being will manifest He provides the evidence that cooked food contributes to the pathological overenlargement of the pituitary gland, which regulates the other glands. In a study of accidental deaths where the victims aged over fifty, it was found that one hundred percent of them had a defective pituitary. The gonads, adrenals, isles of Langerhans and other ductless glands of most folks are exhausted from cooked food. These are the spiritual energy organs. Raw food can assist you to be intuitive, high in prana, and in communion with God.  Dr. Howell's classic work on enzymes precedes the discovery of biological transmutation by Louis Kervan who showed that enzymes are actively involved in the alchemy of converting one element into another. A diet which centers on cooked foods leads to enzyme exhaustion and the impossibility of transmutation. The existence of people in the past, as well as now who eat or drink not, and who carry on normal high energy lives, shows that the human system, when not having to eliminate waste can become a complete ecosystem with recycling and transmutation monitored such that the only input required is air and sunlight and a lifestyle free of all emotional stress, that is, a life of love and service.  The superiority of the raw food diet over cooked food can be tested in many new ways. Kinesiology, which utilizes strength change in the muscle and organ systems is one method. Have the individual stand with right arm (opposite for left handed) extended straight out, parallel to the ground, palm up. Test arm strength by pulling down on wrist. Next test the following procedure. Place in your left palm against the solar plexus separately a processed carbohydrate (sugar), cooked carbohydrate (bread), soaked wheat, sprouted sunflower, baby sunflower greens, sunflower yogurt, and finally sunflower cheese. You will be amazed at the strength generated by raw food, especially sprouted or fermented food, in comparison to the cooked versions. As this food stays in your body twelve to twenty-four hours, it will be likewise strengthening or weakening your body.  Chromatography is another method. This technique has been used in urine analysis up to 1944. In 1953, Dr. E. Pfeiffer used it to test for qualitative and biological values that give indications of enzyme activity. The chromatograph is a picture of color, rings and spike-like forms with a definite pattern that shows enzyme presence. Inorganic minerals, chemicals, or synthetic vitamins and cooked produce showed only colored rings but no definite pattern.  Most folks can demonstrate the enzyme action of ptyalin in the mouth by chewing an unsweetened slice of whole wheat bread. In no time it turns sweet in the mouth. Also, in high school, students use a simple test to demonstrate the presence of starch. By adding one drop of tincture of iodine to starch mixture, a blue color will result. If one teaspoon of starch mixture clears, then the iodine will cause no color change. The starch has been converted to maltose, a form of suqar.  Now on the market is available a thermography machine (AGA Company, 550 County Avenue, Secaucus, New Jersey 07094) which creates photos based on the heat generated by body cells, which depend on the free flow of nutrients and oxygen. The comparative photos that I have done show a clear facial image in the photo of a raw foodist, high enzyme eater. However, the photos of old people or young people on cooked food diet create photos that are totally devoid of detail, this indicating poor circulation and a badly starved body.  With this advancement in technology and the development of new methods of testing, the work of Dr. Howell stands uncontradicted. "The Status of Food Enzymes in Digestion and Metabolism" may be the most important book in scientific nutrition that has been written by a doctor and published in this century. Its range is beyond everyone elses and it makes the subject an exciting challenge. Dr. Howell shows that you can create your own health environment through dietary choice, raw foods in preference to cooked. Given the time, we will see that the man was a genius, creating forty years ago a nutritional theory that will be instrumental in healing degenerative disorders, extending longevity, and delineating some of the physiology of higher states of consciousness. I feel that 1981 will be the "Year of the Enzyme" and the 1980's will be the decade when raw foods will be considered the most important component in one's diet.  Victoras Kulvinskas, M.S.    Woodstock Valley, Connecticut November 6, 1980 